Page 1 of 4 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 18 AUGUST 2023 1. Cabinet has taken note that the National Identity Card (Amendment No. 2) Regulations 2023 would be promulgated. The Regulations – (a) make provision for the validity of the current National Identity Cards to be 20 years as from the date of issue, instead of 10 years; and (b) regulate the issuance of new Identity Cards with the SC (Senior Citizen) logo to citizens attaining the age of 60. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note that the Sugar Insurance Fund (Reduced Premiums) Regulations 2023 would be promulgated with a view to exempting sugar cane planters and métayers producing up to 60 tonnes of sugar from the general and fire insurance premiums payable to the Sugar Insurance Fund Board for crop 2022. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note that the Dental Council (Medical Institutions) (Amendment No. 2) Regulations 2023 would be promulgated to provide for the listing and recognition of the University of Regensburg of the Federal Republic of Germany. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note that in view of the celebration of “Raksha Bandhan” on Wednesday 30 August 2023, the Salary Pay Day in the Public Sector for the month of August 2023 has been preponed to Friday 25 August 2023. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Land Transport and Light Rail signing a Memorandum of Understanding with the Université des Mascareignes for the purpose of promoting collaborative research on issues pertaining to climate change in Mauritius. *** 6. Cabinet has agreed to the Mauritius Revenue Authority signing a Letter of Intent with the General Directorate of Customs and Indirect Taxes of the Republic of France on customs cooperation in the fight against drug trafficking. The Letter of Intent provides for the strengthening of customs cooperation between Mauritius and France/Reunion Island in the fight against trafficking of narcotic products and related money laundering through - Page 2 of 4 (a) exchange of information in real time; (b) regular programming of reinforced joint controls by the two customs administrations both on passengers and commercial freight exchanged between the two islands; (c) improving and sharing of profiling data on persons and goods; and (d) cooperation in the field of training through an annual programme of activities. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to the National Committee on Corporate Governance, signing a Memorandum of Understanding with the Data Protection Office in order to have a formal reciprocal arrangement to enable both institutions to promote data governance and the protection of privacy rights of individuals in the following areas of cooperation – (a) promotion of the protection of privacy rights of individuals and ensure proper data governance in both the public and private sectors; (b) development of tools, papers and guidelines to reinforce the protection of privacy rights and data governance amongst organisations; (c) sharing of information, including relevant statistics, on privacy rights and data governance within organisations; (d) creation and promotion of a networking forum for data protection officers; and (e) organisation of joint workshops, seminars and conferences to promote the protection of privacy rights and data governance. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Youth Empowerment, Sports and Recreation would sign a Memorandum of Understanding with the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation for the live coverage of the Indian Ocean Islands Games 2023 to be held from 25 August to 03 September 2023 in Madagascar. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the status regarding the implementation of some 96 small developments projects across the island, which are being financed under the Indian Grant Assistance. A Memorandum of Understanding was signed in January 2022 with the Government of the Republic of India for the provision of a grant assistance for the implementation of small development projects in Mauritius. *** Page 3 of 4 10. Cabinet has taken note of the creation of mini forests to compensate for the loss of trees felled down in the context of road projects being implemented by the Road Development Authority. In accordance with the policy of the Forestry Service, three trees should be planted in exchange of every tree felled down. Mini Forests would be created on bare lands throughout the island with the collaboration of the private sector. These green areas would contribute in curbing the carbon footprint as well as providing conducive leisure spaces for inhabitants of the respective regions. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note that the Office of the Ombudsperson for Children, in collaboration with International Ombudsman Institute, would organise a workshop on the theme “The role of Ombudsman and Mediators in monitoring the situation of children in conflict with the law and deprived of their liberty” on 05 and 06 September 2023. The objectives of the workshop would be to – (a) discuss the role of Ombudsman and Mediators in monitoring the situation of children in conflict with the law and deprived of their liberty from a child rights perspective; (b) understand the issue of children in conflict with the law as per the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and the United Nations Guideline on Juvenile Justice; (c) identify threats and challenges in monitoring the implementation of the provisions made in the above-mentioned instruments; and (d) share experiences and good practices. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Youth Empowerment, Sports and Recreation in collaboration with the National Youth Council, would launch a National Youth Award Competition on 18 August 2023 with the objectives of – (a) recognising the achievement and outstanding contribution of young people of the Republic of Mauritius; (b) showcasing, celebrating, and advancing the capabilities of youth; (c) creating an environment which would encourage and sustain investments in youth-led projects; (d) illustrating the talent and creativity of youth; and Page 4 of 4 (e) motivating and encouraging other young people to set high standards for youth projects. The National Youth Award would recognise and reward awardees in three categories namely Best Youth, Best Youth Worker, and Best Youth Organisation. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent mission of the Minister of Industrial Development, SMEs and Cooperatives to the United States in the context of the promotion of Mauritian textile and apparel products and consolidation of trade relations between Mauritius and the US. The Minister participated in high-level stakeholder meetings in Washington DC in the context of pre-consultation for the renewal of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) and in the Trade Show at Las Vegas to promote an enhanced visibility of the Mauritian textile and apparel products. The Minister also had meetings with, inter alia, the US Chamber of Commerce, the US Department of Commerce, International Trade Administration on AGOA and trade issues, the Worldwide Responsible Accredited Production, the United States Fashion Industry Association, and the Fashion Design Department of the OTIS College of Art and Design. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Public Officers Welfare Council for a period of two years, with Mr Jaylall Mulloo, MSK as part-time Chairperson. *******