Page 1 of 4 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 06 SEPTEMBER 2024 1. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the National Institute of Curriculum Research and Development Bill into the National Assembly. The object of the Bill would be to, inter alia, provide for the establishment of the National Institute of Curriculum Research and Development, which would be responsible for curriculum research, analysis, development and evaluation with respect to the pre-primary, primary and secondary sub-sectors of education, including any special education needs thereof. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Transfer of Prisoners (Commonwealth Countries) (Amendment) Regulations 2024 so as to revoke and replace the First Schedule to the Transfer of Prisoners (Commonwealth Countries) Regulations 2002, thereby designating an amended list of Commonwealth countries to which the Transfer of Prisoners Act shall apply. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the National Transport Corporation signing a Memorandum of Understanding with the Polytechnics Mauritius Ltd, for the purpose of training and cooperation in the fields of Built Environment, Engineering, Logistics & Transport. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the setting up of a Project Management and Contract Administration Unit, under the Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Development, as mentioned in the Annex to Budget Speech 2024/2025. The Unit would, inter alia, – (a) ensure that projects would be implemented in a timely manner, within approved costs and meet the expected outcomes; (b) formulate policies and issue instructions, directives, procedures, circulars, technical notes and manuals relating to project management and contract administration; and (c) organise, conduct or arrange for appropriate training programmes for public officers involved in project implementation. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note that following the meeting between the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom on 23 July 2024, Mauritius and the United Kingdom have agreed to continue the negotiations on the exercise of sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago launched with the previous UK Government in November 2022. Page 2 of 4 Cabinet has also taken note that an agreed resolution to this long-standing, complex and important issue is in the interest of both parties, and that the United Kingdom is working in close coordination with the United States. Mauritius will endeavour expeditiously to conclude a negotiated agreement that respects international law and the sovereignty of Mauritius, respects the interests of the former inhabitants of the Chagos Archipelago, enhances environmental cooperation, protects and preserves vital security interests on Diego Garcia, and builds a long-term strategic partnership between the two countries as close Commonwealth partners. Cabinet has further taken note that to enhance these efforts the UK Prime Minister has appointed Mr Jonathan Powell as his political envoy to expedite the conclusion of the negotiations. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the judgment of the High Court of Delhi in the case of Tiger Global International III Holdings v. The Authority for Advance Rulings (Income-Tax) & Ors. In its judgment, the High Court of Delhi has, inter alia, highlighted that – (a) the mere fact that of an entity being situated in Mauritius and of investments in Mauritius being routed through the Mauritian jurisdiction cannot result in a default adverse inference or raise a presumption of illegality or of such an entity being a colourable device, nor are Mauritian entities required to satisfy any separate standard of legitimacy or stricter standard of proof; and (b) Mauritius is one of the more favourable jurisdictions for Foreign Institutional Investors seeking to invest in India as a result of its proximity to India as well as the wide array of agreements that it had entered into with various nations across the globe. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the 27th Meeting of the Mauritius- Seychelles Joint Commission of the Extended Continental Shelf held in Mauritius on 28 August 2024. Discussions were held on, inter alia, the launching of the Second Phase of the Sea Cucumber Exploratory Fisheries, the Strategic Plan 2023-2027, and the Carbon Credit/Seagrass Mapping. The next meeting of the Joint Commission would be held in the first quarter of 2025. *** 8. Cabinet has agreed to the hosting in Mauritius of the Annual General Assembly of the ‘Association des Villes et Collectivités de l’Océan Indien’ (AVCOI) from 09 to 13 September 2024. The objectives of the AVCOI, which consists of Local Authorities of Mauritius, Madagascar, Reunion Island, Seychelles, Comoros and Mayotte, are, inter alia, to promote and consolidate regional integration, and to improve the standard of living of citizens of the Indian Ocean islands. *** Page 3 of 4 9. Cabinet has taken note of the activities which would be organised by the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity to mark the International Day of Older Persons which is observed on 01 October every year. A national event would be held at the Swami Vivekananda International Convention Centre, Pailles, on Sunday 29 September 2024. The Senior Citizens Council would also organise residential workshops for the elderly at four Recreation Centres around the island in the month of October 2024 with a view to sharing knowledge on emerging technologies, health, road safety and security as well as sensitising them on elderly abuse and their rights as senior citizens. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security would hold a workshop on the occasion of World Rabies Day, which is celebrated on 28 September. The theme for this year’s commemoration is “Breaking Rabies Boundaries.” The workshop to be held on 27 September 2024, would, amongst others, be an opportunity to celebrate the clinically free status of Mauritius from rabies. It would also aim at increasing awareness on - (a) the need to boost the involvement of multiple sectors in the prevention and fight against rabies; and (b) the benefits of Mauritius as a rabies-free country on an international scale. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Public Service, Administrative and Institutional Reforms would organise, on 21 September 2024, an Open Day, in collaboration with other Ministries and Departments at the Farmer’s Service Centre in Goodlands, to promote safety and health at the workplace. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the commendable performance of Mauritian para- athletes at the Paris 2024 Paralympic Games. Mr Yovanni Philippe marked Mauritian history by claiming a bronze medal in men’s 400 metres T20. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the appointment of Mr Vipin Naugah, Head Investigations at the Competition Commission of Mauritius, as Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners of the COMESA Competition Commission. The COMESA Competition Commission aims at the promotion and enforcement of competition law, policy and regulation within the COMESA region. The Competition Commission of Mauritius holds a seat on the Board of Commissioners of the COMESA Competition Commission since its establishment in 2013. *** Page 4 of 4 14. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Attorney General, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the Ministerial Meeting of the Tokyo International Conference on African Development (TICAD) held in Tokyo, Japan. The Ministerial Meeting, which laid the ground work and was the preparatory for the Ninth TICAD Summit to be held in August 2025 in Yokohama, focused on three main pillars, namely – (a) Society: Realising a Sustainable Future; (b) Peace and Stability: Ensuring Human Dignity and Human Security; and (c) Economy: Promoting Trade and Investment. In the margins of the Ministerial Meeting, the Attorney General, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade had several bilateral meetings, including the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Japan, and other African Ministers. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note that the Construction Industry Authority would launch its new corporate identity on 14 September 2024 and registered entities, such as contractors, consultants, and public bodies involved in the implementation of infrastructural projects and regulation of health and safety measures in the construction industry, would be informed accordingly. A communication campaign would also be held to inform the public at large of the new responsibilities of the Construction Industry Authority. *** 16. Cabinet has taken note of the renewal of the contract of Mr Ramesh Sunt as Ombudsperson for Sports for a further period of one year. ********