Page 1 of 6 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 08 DECEMBER 2023 1. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the Tripartite Committee Meeting on salary compensation for the year 2024 held on 07 December 2023. In view of the current situation and to restore the purchasing power of employees, the Tripartite Committee proposed a monthly salary compensation of 10% of basic salary, with a minimum of Rs1,500 and a maximum of Rs2,000. Some 110,000 employees in the public sector and 350,000 employees in the private sector would benefit from the salary compensation. The monthly CSG Income Allowance of Rs2,000 for all employees earning up to Rs25,000 and Rs1,000 for those earning above Rs25,000 up to Rs50,000 would be maintained. In order to support enterprises that are facing difficulties to maintain their productive capacity, Government would meet the cost of salary compensation for – (a) Small and Medium Enterprises with a turnover of up to Rs100 million; (b) manufacturing enterprises in the export sector, in addition to the existing support being provided; and (c) manufacturing enterprises catering for the local market. Government would also meet the cost of salary compensation for registered Non- Governmental Organisations. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note that the Freeport (Amendment) Regulations 2023 would be promulgated to provide for an extension of the time limit of the authorisation granted by the Economic Development Board to a Private Freeport Developer to provide warehousing facilities for the storage of goods in a Freeport zone to any person, from 31 December 2023 to 31 December 2024. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note that the Human Tissue (Removal, Preservation and Transplant) (Importation and Use of Corneal Tissue) Regulations 2023 and the Human Tissue (Removal, Preservation and Transplant) (Amendment of Schedule) Regulations 2023 would be promulgated. Page 2 of 6 The Human Tissue (Removal, Preservation and Transplant) (Importation of Corneal Tissue) Regulations 2023 would allow a health institution or a person through a health institution to apply for the importation and use of corneal tissue from a registered eye bank. The Regulations also outline a number of preconditions that have to be met prior to the importation of corneal tissues. The Human Tissue (Removal, Preservation and Transplant) (Amendment of Schedule) Regulations 2023 set out the required conditions for certifying a person as brain dead. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note that the price of sugar for crop 2023, has been fixed as follows – Growing Side - Rs27,140/T of sugar @ 98.5 percent Polarisation Milling Side - Rs26,000/T of sugar @ 98.5 percent Polarisation The new prices would be communicated to the Sugar Insurance Fund Board for the determination of the general requirement premium for that crop year and the compensation to be paid in case of declaration of Event Year. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the adoption of a revised Barachois Policy for the allocation of vested barachois for aquaculture projects which has been aligned with the provisions of the Fisheries Act. The main objective of the Barachois Policy is to define the criteria and procedures for the allocation of vested barachois to eligible promoters in line with the principles of good governance, accountability and transparent procedures for the allocation of a Government property. The Policy is intended to act as an informative paper for the guidance of promoters interested in engaging in aquaculture activities within a vested barachois. *** 6. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Academy of Design and Innovation (ADI) and CIEL Textile Ltd (CTL) which would set out a collaborative framework for the promotion of practice-based learning, technical education, research and knowledge exchange, in accordance with the industry needs. The Memorandum of Understanding would further the link between the academia and the industry and provide for – Page 3 of 6 (a) ADI to enter into one or more binding agreements or undertakings with CTL for the conduct of CTL graduate programmes in Madagascar, development of short courses and training programmes and the provision of consultancy services; (b) ADI to assist in the re-skilling and upskilling of CTL employees, explore the possibility of becoming a pool of knowledge in apparel and textiles in Madagascar with the support of CTL, and work on collaborative research projects; (c) CTL to provide facilities and support to ADI students for professional practice and practice-based research and knowledge exchange; and (d) ADI and CTL to promote their existing collaboration on international projects, and jointly participate in international trade fairs and shows. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius, in the context of the 28th Session of the Conference of Parties (COP28) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change - (i) endorsing the following initiatives – (a) the COP28 Declaration on Climate and Health; (b) the Global Renewables and Energy Efficiency Pledge; (c) the Emirates Declaration on Sustainable Agriculture, Resilient Food Systems and Climate Action; (d) the Global Cooling Pledge; (e) the Mangrove Breakthrough; and (ii) joining the Mangrove Alliance on Climate *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that following an explosion in a warehouse in the industrial zone of Providence near the Seychelles International Airport and severe flooding, landslides and damage caused by heavy rainfall, a State of Emergency was declared in Seychelles on 07 December 2023. In this connection, the Government of Mauritius would grant financial assistance to the tune of USD50,000 to the Government of the Republic of Seychelles, as a gesture of solidarity. *** 9. Cabinet has agreed to the provision of a financial assistance of USD25,000 to the Kingdom of Morocco, as a gesture of solidarity following the devastating earthquake which struck the central part of Morocco in September 2023. *** Page 4 of 6 10. Cabinet has taken note that the structure of the National Task Force for Religious Festivals would be formalised by way of publication of a General Notice in the Government Gazette. The General Notice would, inter alia, outline the composition and functions of the National Task Force. This would ensure that religious festivals celebrated at national level in Mauritius be held in the best possible conditions. The National Task Force would look into the organisation of the following religious festivals – (a) Thaipoosam Cavadee; (b) Maha Shivaratree; (c) Shab-e-Barat, Ramadan and Eid-Ul-Fitr; (d) Pilgrimage to Père Laval; (e) Ganesh Chaturthi; and (f) Shri Venkateshwara Pooja For the effective functioning of the National Task Force, a Secretariat would be established at the level of the Prime Minister’s Office, with appropriate staffing. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note that appropriate Regulations would be promulgated under the National Heritage Fund Act to list Grand Bassin (Ganga Talao) as a National Heritage Site. The Ganga Talao would henceforth be known as Ganga Talao Spiritual Sanctuary. *** 12. Cabinet has agreed to the implementation of the upgrading of the Quartier Militaire Road (B6) project aiming at remedying the poor geometry of the B6 Road from Motorway M1 towards Curepipe, which was presently a road safety hazard. *** 13. Cabinet has agreed to the implementation of two drain projects for the following two projects listed under the National Flood Management Programme – (a) Drainworks at L’Amitié Phase 2B; and (b) Construction of swales, attenuation ponds, culverts and drain networks at Dakri, Black River, Phase 2. *** Page 5 of 6 14. Cabinet has agreed to the submission of the Third Periodic Report on the implementation of the UNESCO 2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage (ICH) and the Second Biennial Report on the status of “Sega Tambour Chagos” inscribed on the list of Intangible Cultural Heritage in Need of Urgent Safeguarding. The Periodic Reporting allows State Parties to the Convention to assess their implementation of the Convention, evaluate their capacities for safeguarding their ICH, report on their inventories of ICH and update the status of the elements inscribed on the Representative List of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity and on the list of Intangible Cultural Heritage in need of urgent safeguarding. The Biennial Reports provide information on the current situation of the “Sega Tambour Chagos”, the effectiveness of the safeguarding measures implemented and the challenges encountered. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note of the programme of activities for the National Christmas Celebrations 2023 to be held during the month of December 2023 as follows - (a) a National Christmas Carol Evening and a Popular Show at Espace Emilien Pierre, Sainte Croix Church, Port Louis on 23 December 2023; (b) a Christmas Fun Day on 13 December 2023; (c) a Fun Day for Children on 09 December 2023 at the Mahatma Gandhi Secondary School, Flacq; (d) a one-week Christmas Activity from 18 to 22 December 2023 by the CELPAC Unit at CLACs Bel Air, Chemin Grenier, Cottage, Flacq, Flic en Flac, Fond du Sac, Grand Bois, Mahebourg, Montagne Longue, Pailles, Petite Rivière, Rivière du Rempart, St Pierre and Triolet culminating in the setting up of a Christmas corner at the respective CLACs; (e) the 26th Edition of the Songs of the Seasons 2023 by the Conservatoire National de Musique François Mitterand on 16 and 17 December 2023 at the Caudan Arts Centre; (f) a one-day educational and recreational activity at Trou Chenilles Open Air Museum by Le Morne Heritage Trust Fund in collaboration with the group ‘Abaim’; and (g) a Magical Christmas Day comprising a book launch, storytelling sessions and community engagement by the Nelson Mandela Centre for African Culture Trust Fund. *** Page 6 of 6 16. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the visit to Mauritius of two Experts from the Duke of Edinburgh’s International Award Foundation. The objectives of the visit were to – (a) appraise the operation of the Award Programme in Mauritius and in Rodrigues; (b) conduct Training of Trainers for the Youth Officers in order to enhance their competence, and to provide them with knowledge and skills to improve the implementation of the Award Programme; and (c) promote a better understanding of the Award Programme requirements so as to increase the percentage of participation of our youth in the programme. *** 17. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Youth Empowerment, Sports and Recreation in the Ministerial Meeting of the ‘Commission de la Jeunesse et des Sports de l’Océan Indien’ (CJSOI) held in Reunion Island. A Youth and Sports calendar of activities for the year 2024 comprising, inter alia, training for sports educators/coaches for young people and training in sports medicine was agreed upon. The Committee took note that the 13th edition of the CJSOI Games would be held in 2025 in Seychelles and would comprise sports competitions and a ‘Volet Jeunesse’. The Minister of Youth and Culture of Djibouti was unanimously elected as the new President of the CJSOI, in replacement of the Minister of Youth, Sports and Family of Seychelles who had completed her mandate. The Minister of Youth and Sports of Comoros was elected as the Vice-President of the CJSOI. Mr A. Cheetamun, Principal Youth Officer of the Ministry of Youth Empowerment, Sports and Recreation has been reconducted as Secretary-General of the CJSOI for a period of three years. *** 18. Cabinet has taken note of the constitution of the Board of the Mauritius Digital Promotion Agency, with Mr Dhurma Ashdeo Soburrun as part-time Chairperson. *** 19. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Ethics Committee under the Clinical Trials Act 2011, with Mr Dinay Reetoo, Assistant Parliamentary Counsel as part-time Chairperson. ******