Page 1 of 5 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – 10 SEPTEMBER 2021 1. Cabinet has taken note that the Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development would promulgate – (a) the Finance and Audit (Rodrigues Subsidy Account) (Amendment) Regulations 2021. The object of the Regulations is to change the basis of preparation of financial statements of the Rodrigues Subsidy Account from International Financial Reporting Standards to International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), in line with the reform initiated by Government since 2017 to gradually implement accrual IPSAS in the public sector; and (b) the Finance and Audit (Amendment of Schedule) Regulations 2021 to amend the Schedule to the Finance and Audit Act so as to include the Rodrigues Subsidy Account as a new item. ---- 2. Cabinet has taken note that the Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development would promulgate the Statutory Bodies (Accounts and Audit) (Extension of time during COVID-19 period 2021) Regulations 2021. The object of the Regulations is to prescribe a new deadline, as provided in the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2021, for the submission of annual report and audit report by the auditor to the Board of a Statutory Body given that the submission date, i.e. 30 April 2021, fell during the COVID-19 period for year 2021. The auditor would have to submit the annual report and audit report to the Board of a Statutory Body not later than two months after the COVID-19 period for year 2021 lapses, i.e. 30 June 2021. ---- 3. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Economic Development Board and Invest India, the National Investment Promotion Agency of India. The Memorandum of Understanding has, inter alia, the following objectives - (a) strengthening the bilateral investment relations and developing reciprocal business cooperation between Mauritius and India; (b) providing practical investment information to enterprises with a view to facilitating foreign direct investment; and (c) establishing a practical framework agreeable to both jurisdictions and taking into account the national legislation to promote bilateral investment and exchanging experiences and relevant information on their respective investors and investment initiatives. ---- Page 2 of 5 4. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security would sign a Memorandum of Understanding with the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity with the National Empowerment Foundation (NEF) as the implementing arm, for the execution of various agricultural projects to support the beneficiaries of NEF. The Memorandum of Understanding would have the following objectives – (a) training of beneficiaries in the fields of agriculture, food processing and livestock breeding; (b) facilitating the registration of small planters, farmers and bee-keepers; and (c) provision of technical assistance and resources to beneficiaries to start agri- business activities. The Food and Agricultural Research and Extension Institute would extend its assistance to the beneficiaries in terms of training in crop production, livestock breeding and agro-processing. ---- 5. Cabinet has taken note that a Memorandum of Mutual Understanding was signed between the Ministry of Blue Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries and Shipping and the Federal Agency for Fishery of the Russian Federation on 08 September 2021. The purpose of the Memorandum is to develop cooperation in the field of fisheries and aquaculture on a mutually beneficial and equitable basis in accordance with the national legislation of each party. ---- 6. Cabinet has taken note of the activities which would be organised by the Ministry of Arts and Cultural Heritage in collaboration with the Aapravasi Ghat Trust Fund to commemorate the 187th Anniversary of the Arrival of Indentured Labourers in Mauritius on 02 November 2021. ---- 7. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the 42nd Eastern and Southern Africa Anti- Money Laundering Group (ESAAMLG) Task Force of Senior Officials and 21st Council of Ministers Virtual Meetings which were held recently. The applications made by Mauritius for the upgrading of Recommendations 8, 24 and 33 were considered and had been rated as follows – (a) Recommendation 8 (Non-Profit Organisations) from Non-Compliant to Largely Compliant; Page 3 of 5 (b) Recommendation 24 (Transparency and Beneficial Ownership of Legal Persons) from Partially Compliant to Largely Compliant; and (c) Recommendation 33 (Statistics) from Partially Compliant to Compliant. Following the upgrading of the above three Recommendations, Mauritius is now Compliant or Largely Compliant in 39 out of the 40 Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Recommendations on Technical Compliance with only Recommendation 15 (New Technologies) rated as Partially Compliant. ---- 8. Cabinet has taken note of the participation of the Minister of Land Transport and Light Rail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the First Africa-CARICOM Summit held virtually on 07 September 2021 under the chair of the President of the Republic of Kenya. The theme of the Summit was ‘‘Unity across Continents and Ocean- Opportunities for Deepening Integration.’’ The Summit was held in line with the Declaration on ‘‘Promoting Closer Collaboration and Cooperation between the African Union, the African Diaspora and People of African Descent in the Caribbean and Pacific Regions’’, adopted by the 33rd Ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union in February 2020. The main objectives of the Summit were, inter alia, to promote ties and engagements between peoples of African descent in Africa and the Caribbean, and to build social, economic and political linkages that would promote prosperity and progress in the two regions. ---- 9. Cabinet has taken note that the President of the Republic has appointed Mr Telkraj Parbhunath as Commissioner on the Commission of Inquiry set up to inquire and report on, inter alia, the circumstances in which the Contract of Affreightment was awarded to Betamax Ltd. He would replace Dr Pushpawant Boodhun who has tendered his resignation as Commissioner. ---- 10. Cabinet has taken note that the Minister of Health and Wellness has promulgated the COVID-19 (Closing Down of Premises and Restrictions of Activities) (No. 3) (Amendment No. 4) Regulations 2021 to allow certain activities to be carried out on public beach/sea, namely – (a) any sports activities, boating activities and licensed Class I commercial activities under the Beach Authority (Traders’ Licence) Regulations 2004; and (b) for the celebration of the religious ceremony of Ganesh Chaturthi to be held on 11 September 2021. ---- Page 4 of 5 11. Cabinet has taken note that the travel restriction for passengers coming from Brazil and South Africa or having transited through those countries during the last 15 days before entering Mauritius has been lifted on 09 September 2021. The Notice to Airmen (NOTAM) has been cancelled accordingly by the Director of Civil Aviation. ---- 12. Cabinet has taken note of the situation of the COVID-19 pandemic prevailing across the world. Some 224 million cases have been reported globally, of which 200.6 million persons have been successfully treated. With regard to Mauritius, as at 10 September 2021, there were 3,584 active cases of COVID-19, out of which three were serious cases. Over the past week, nine deaths were attributed to COVID-19. Cabinet has also taken note of progress in the COVID-19 Vaccination Programme. As at 09 September 2021, 838,127 persons had received a first dose of vaccine (representing 66 percent of the population). 776,923 persons had been fully vaccinated (representing 61 percent of the population). Some 500,000 doses of Sinopharm vaccine were received on 09 September 2021. ---- 13. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by the Ministry of Health and Wellness to mark World Patient Safety Day 2021, celebrated on 17 September. The theme for this year is "Safe Maternal and Newborn Care". The Ministry of Health and Wellness would organise the following activities – (a) launching of the Preconception Care Services at Caudan Arts Centre on 17 September 2021, followed by a half-day workshop; (b) capacity building of healthcare professionals on antenatal, postnatal, newborn care and breastfeeding; (c) launching of a booklet entitled “Guide: Votre santé avant la grossesse”, pamphlets on “Soins Préconceptionnels” and three short videos on planning a pregnancy; (d) radio and TV programmes to sensitise the population at large on the need of safe maternal and newborn care; and (e) sensitisation sessions for youths on preconception care and breastfeeding. The Fourth Edition of the “Guidelines on the Clinical Use of Blood” would also be launched. ---- Page 5 of 5 14. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by Local Authorities in the context of World Clean-Up Day 2021 which would be celebrated on 18 September. The World Clean-Up Day is held annually in more than 180 countries on the third Saturday of September with the aim to be the biggest waste collection day and the intention to raise awareness of the mismanaged waste crisis by mobilising all spheres of society to participate in clean-up actions. The campaign started with a training programme on the importance of cleaning for a sustainable environment for Local Authorities by the African Network for Policy Research and Advocacy for Sustainability. The activities for the World Clean-Up Day are being held over a two-week period starting on 04 September 2021 to culminate with a major clean-up, thematic bulky wastes collection and embellishment campaigns during the weekend of 18 and 19 September 2021. ---- 15. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Taxi Operators Welfare Fund Board with Mr Mohammad Parwez Nunnoo as Chairperson. ---- 16. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Professional Architects’ Council for the period 2021 – 2023. ---- 17. Cabinet has taken note of the appointment of Mrs Françoise Marechal-Charlotte as Chairperson of the Executive Committee of the National Women Entrepreneur Council. ---- 18. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of Le Morne Heritage Trust Fund Board with Mr Jean Claude Jance as Chairperson.