Page 1 of 14 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 05 SEPTEMBER 2025 1. Cabinet has agreed to the signature of the following Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) which will be exchanged during the forthcoming State Visit of the Prime Minister to India to further consolidate the longstanding relations with India, by opening new avenues of cooperation, reinforcing shared values, and providing a solid framework for future collaboration across priority sectors - (a) MoU for the implementation of Phase II of Small Development Projects (High Impact Community Development Projects for the total capital cost of Rs500 million. The projects relate primarily to socio-economic development, particularly creation of infrastructure in the education, basic healthcare or community development sectors. Livelihood activity, skill development, renewable energy, conservation of environmental and cultural heritage, empowerment of women and child welfare, and disaster risk reduction, shall be primary themes of the projects. (b) MoU between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of Mauritius in the power sector covering the following areas of collaboration– (i) cooperation in power sector for energy security and transition; (ii) power planning, power generation, including Liquified Natural Gas transmission, distribution, and grid management; (iii) renewable energy; (iv) energy conservation and efficiency improvement; (v) capacity building and institutional strengthening; and (vi) technology and digitalisation. (c) MoU between the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research of India and the Mauritius Oceanography Institute for research and education in marine science and technology in the following areas of cooperation - (i) matters relating to oceanography and technology; (ii) exchange of scientists and research scholars for the purpose of research, training and consultations; (iii) exchange of expertise and scientific and technical information; (iv) joint identification of scientific and technical problems, formulation and implementation of a joint research programme in areas of Marine Science of common interest; and Page 2 of 14 (v) joint research work on hydrocarbon and seabed minerals in the Exclusive Economic Zone of Mauritius under the co-ordination of the Department for Continental Shelf, Maritime Zones Administration and Exploration. (d) MoU between the Ministry of Public Service and Administrative Reforms and Karmayogi Bharat under the Department of Personnel and Training, India, to work collaboratively towards establishing and strengthening a digital capacity- building ecosystem, aiming at - (i) facilitating knowledge exchange; (ii) adapting and integrating digital solutions; (iii) promoting sustainable capacity building; and (iv) strengthening institutional partnership. Furthermore, two MoUs will also be exchanged between the University of Mauritius and the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India; and the University of Mauritius and the Indian Institute of Plantation Management, Bengaluru, India. The following Agreement/MoU will also be renewed - (a) the Technical Cooperation Agreement on the cooperation for the establishment of Telemetry, Tracking and Telecommunications Station for Satellites and Launch Vehicles and for cooperation in the fields of space, research, science and application; and (b) the MoU for cooperation in the field of Hydrography. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Prime Minister in the 45th Summit of Heads of State and Government of the Southern African Development Community (SADC), held in Antananarivo, Madagascar. The theme for the Summit was “Advancing Industrialisation, Agricultural Transformation, and Energy”. The Summit agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding in respect of Western Sahara. The Prime Minister signed the Agreement amending the Treaty of the SADC to establish the SADC Parliament. In his address at the Opening Ceremony, the Prime Minister highlighted that peaceful transitions in SADC countries illustrate shared commitment to the values of good governance and the rule of law. He underscored the unwavering commitment of Mauritius to further the vision and objectives of the Community. He also expressed the gratitude of Mauritius to all the members of the SADC for their continuous support in our struggle to recover our sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago including Diego Garcia. He highlighted that this historic victory had been made possible largely due to the unity and solidarity of the entire African continent without which, we would not have reached this significant outcome with the United Kingdom. On the issue of regional security, the Prime Minister expressed the appreciation of Mauritius for the progress made by the SADC mission in Mozambique. Page 3 of 14 In his address on the theme of the Summit, the Prime Minister called for the SADC Community to build resilience especially in the wake of the current unpredictable and changing global economic landscape arising from the imposition of tariffs across several jurisdictions. He enjoined the Community to embrace economic diversification without compromising sustainable development and renew efforts for ensuring food security. He shared how Mauritius has embarked on a transformative journey with structural reforms being brought while putting human development at the core of development. The Prime Minister informed the Summit of the decision to re-establish the Regional Cooperation and Integration Council, as a high-level public-private sector forum, to address regional cooperation and integration issues. He underscored that a common stand and a pooling of efforts were imperative for the Community to withstand external shocks and face the challenges, especially in the context of the renewal of the African Growth and Opportunity Act. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Prime Minister in the 9th Tokyo International Conference on African Development (TICAD-9) held in Yokohama, Japan. The theme of the 9th TICAD was “Co-creating innovative solutions with Africa”. At the end of the two-day deliberations, the Conference adopted by acclamation the TICAD-9 Yokohama Declaration entitled “Co-create innovative solutions with Africa” which is broadly aligned to Africa’s development priorities as contained in the AU Agenda 2063 and the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In his address during the plenary session of TICAD-9, the Prime Minister highlighted the crucial role played by the TICAD over the last 30 years in laying down the foundations for long and lasting partnerships between Africa and Japan. He also underscored the setting up of the Mauritius-Japan Business Facilitation Committee and discussions engaged for the conclusion of an Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement. He also called for more cooperation between African Small Island Developing States and Japan in unlocking the potential of ocean economy. Prior to the start of the Conference, the Prime Minister had a bilateral meeting with Prime Minister Ishiba. During the discussions, both counterparts agreed to strengthen relations between Mauritius and Japan at the bilateral and international levels. At the invitation of the Emperor of Japan, the Prime Minister also attended a Tea Ceremony at the Imperial Palace along with other Heads of State and Governments participating in the TICAD-9. During his visit, the Prime Minister inaugurated the Embassy of Mauritius in Tokyo which will be called upon to play an important role in further strengthening the bilateral relations between the two countries and in unlocking Japanese investment opportunities into Mauritius. The Economic Development Board organised a Business Meet with prominent Japanese companies with the participation of several Mauritian companies. This interaction was an opportunity to gauge investment opportunities in Mauritius in areas such as financial services, banking, bunkering, port modernisation and logistics. *** Page 4 of 14 4. Cabinet has taken note that HE Mr Emmanuel Macron, President of France, will undertake an official visit to Mauritius on 21 and 22 November 2025, on his way to attend the G20 Leaders’ Summit in Johannesburg, scheduled on 22 and 23 November 2025. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to Government engaging in discussions on Electoral Reforms. A document will be considered by Cabinet shortly and thereafter wide consultations will be held with relevant stakeholders. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note that Mr Meghanathan Pillay, CSK, is being proposed as Executive Chairperson of Airport Holdings Limited. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note that the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister recently met Mr Franceau Aubret Grandcourt, GOSK, Chief Commissioner of Rodrigues. Discussions during that meeting focused on the political landscape and upcoming development projects in Rodrigues. The Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister will also hold a meeting with Mrs Franchette Gaspard Pierre Louis, CSK, Minority Leader of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly shortly. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that in a letter dated 26 August 2025, the International Olympic Committee has informed the Mauritius National Olympic Committee (NOC) that it is suspending all funding, except for payment to athletes who have benefitted from scholarships under the Solidarité Olympique. This decision has been taken in view of the fact that holding of elections of the Mauritius NOC is still pending, which is not in conformity with the Charte Olympique. This issue has been viewed with serious concern, the moreso as it might lead to the suspension of the Mauritius NOC, which would have serious repercussions on the participation of Mauritian athletes in Olympic competitions. The Minister of Youth and Sports will hold a Press Conference on Saturday 06 September 2025 and thereafter hold a meeting with all National Sports Federations to explain the situation. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by the Ministry of Arts and Culture and other Government institutions to commemorate the 125th birth anniversary of Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam to honour his enduring legacy, recall the values of unity and nation building that guided his leadership and sensitise younger generations to his role in shaping the identity and development of Mauritius. Marking this milestone through cultural, educational and institutional activities will not only preserve the memory of his contribution but also reaffirm the importance of civic responsibility, social equity and national cohesion. To commemorate his 125th birth anniversary, the following activities will be held on 18 September 2025 - Page 5 of 14 (a) the launching of an exhibition on the life and legacy of Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam at the Salon Mairal of the Municipal City Council of Port-Louis and the launching of a special commemorative stamp and first day cover on Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam by the Mauritius Post Ltd; (b) a Wreath Laying ceremony at the Statue of Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam at the Port-Louis Waterfront; and (c) a Wreath Laying ceremony at the Bust of Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam at the Memorial Park in Kewal Nagar and cultural programme. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note that the Republic of Mauritius has been officially designated as the Primary Jurisdiction for the Headquarters of the Africa Credit Rating Agency (AfCRA) by the African Peer Review Mechanism. The initiative stems from an African Union Executive Council Decision aiming at establishing a private sector-led, independent and self-sustaining African credit rating agency. The AfCRA is expected to deliver credit assessments that more accurately reflect African economic realities, in contrast to traditional global rating agencies. The designation of Mauritius as the host country for AfCRA is a major milestone that reinforces Mauritius as a continental leader in financial governance and innovation. It reaffirms the credibility of Mauritius as a trusted International Financial Centre, committed to advancing African priorities through transparency, regulatory soundness, and professional excellence. With AfCRA headquartered in Mauritius, our jurisdiction will serve as a focal point for promoting investor confidence, facilitating intra-African financial flows, and deepening local capital markets across the African continent. *** 11. Cabinet has agreed to the implementation of the recommendations of the Report of the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Work Permit Issues. The Inter-Ministerial Committee under the chair of the Minister of Labour and Industrial Relations and comprising the Minister of Tourism; the Minister of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity; the Minister of Industry, SME and Cooperatives; the Minister of Information Technology, Communication and Innovation and the Secretary for Home Affairs met on several occasions to look into the difficulties being encountered by private companies in obtaining work and residence permits. The Committee formulated several recommendations, comprising, inter alia – (a) the existing pre-established quota/ratio principle will be replaced by a system based on evidence of inability to recruit locally; (b) the maximum allowable period of stay for foreign workers in all sectors will be 10 years; (c) the Private Recruitment Agencies Regulations will be amended to ensure transparency, efficiency and ethics in recruitment of workers; Page 6 of 14 (d) signing of Memoranda of Understanding with sourcing countries so as to ensure regular, ethical, and orderly recruitment of foreign workers; (e) new regulations for centralised lodging accommodation will be promulgated to provide for grant of Lodging and Accommodation Permit (LAP) to the owner of the building rather than to each employer renting the building as is the case presently; (f) employers will be allowed to submit work permit applications and applications for LAP in parallel to enable simultaneous processing instead of awaiting receipt of the LAP to process the application for work permit; (g) the Work Permit Module on the National E-licensing System will be enhanced by the Economic Development Board to cater for applications and processing of Certificates of Exemption, Employment Permits as well as cancellation of permits, contract vetting, among others, and issue of electronic work permits; (h) in order to cater for the welfare of migrant workers in Mauritius, an amount of Rs500 per migrant worker per year to be transferred by employers to a special fund to be used to pay for living expenses and legal fees to represent workers in case of dispute with their employers; (i) conduct of regular joint crack-down operations with the Passport and Immigration Office to track foreigners working on a tourist visa or working without a valid work permit; and (j) educational institutions will put up a monitoring mechanism to ensure that their foreign students get a valid authorisation to work and the number of hours worked is monitored to ensure compliance with legal provisions. The implementation of some of the recommendations will require further consultations and legislative amendments. A Monitoring Committee will be set up at the level of the Ministry of Labour and Industrial Relations comprising representatives of the Home Affairs Division of the Prime Minister’s Office, the Passport and Immigration Office and the Economic Development Board. *** 12. Cabinet has agreed to the Higher Education Commission implementing the National Credit Value and Transfer System Framework with the following objectives – (a) legislative and institutional arrangements, defining duties and responsibilities of stakeholders and authorities; (b) development and provision of the education and training system; (c) career development, guidance and job placement, information and orientation, including labour market mobility; and Page 7 of 14 (d) developing mutual transparency, trust and cooperation. The National Credit Value and Transfer System closely aligns with the European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System. The implementation of the National Credit Value and Transfer System also complements the Mauritian National Qualifications Framework which defines qualification levels based on learning outcomes and complexity. The Higher Education Commission will organise capacity-building workshops for participants from both public and private higher education institutions to support the effective implementation of the National Credit Value and Transfer System. *** 13. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Waste Management and Resource Recovery (Registration of Scavenging Contractor) Regulations 2025 which will provide for, inter alia, the following – (a) an application for registration approved by the Minister; (b) ownership of a minimum of two tipper lorries by the scavenging contractor; (c) registration for a period of three years and renewal applicable on expiry of validity for further periods of three years; (d) fees of Rs20,000 imposed for registration and renewal of registration of scavenging contractors; (e) application for renewal at least one month before the date of expiry of the registration and a surcharge of 35% applicable for renewal after expiry date; (f) fine not exceeding Rs25,000 applicable on conviction; and (g) a Certificate of Registration with conditions to be issued to the Scavenging Contractors as per the Third Schedule of the new Regulations. The Waste Management and Resource Recovery (Registration of Scavenging Contractor) Regulations 2025 will come into operation on 01 October 2025. A transitionary period of 60 days will be provided, during which a Certificate of Registration issued under the previous Regulations shall remain valid to allow existing scavenging contractors enough time to submit their applications under the new Regulations. *** 14. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Local Government (Amendment of Schedule) (No. 3) Regulations 2025 and the Local Government (Fees) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 which will provide for the introduction of a new trade, namely “Seller of foodstuffs and non-foodstuffs on islet”, together with the applicable corresponding fees. *** Page 8 of 14 15. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the National Archives (Access to Public and Destruction of Public Records) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 to enable henceforth, the Responsible Officer of a Ministry or Department to cause records, which have been determined by the Public Records Appraisal Committee, to be shredded for recycling or to be disposed of by any other secure methods as recommended by the Ministry responsible for the subject of environment and in the presence of any officer deputed by him. *** 16. Cabinet has agreed to the restructuring and strengthening of the Drains Infrastructure Construction Ltd which is responsible for the implementation of the National Flood Management Programme. The restructuring exercise will be carried out in response to a recent internal audit which has revealed significant previous operational shortcomings and governance failures, and to secure its future as a critical vehicle for implementing drains projects. *** 17. Cabinet has agreed to the setting up of the Mauritius Biomass Fuel Aggregation Limited which will be mainly responsible for the sourcing of local and imported biomass in the context of the implementation of the National Biomass Initiative. The Mauritius Biomass Fuel Aggregation Limited, a joint venture between Government and the Independent Power Producers, will be responsible for the procurement and all logistical management related to importation, port handling, aggregation, transportation and warehousing of both local and imported biomass for use by the Independent Power Producers. *** 18. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius supporting the draft decision tabled at the United Nations General Assembly today to convene the resumed session of the Palestine Conference on 22 September 2025. Mauritius will participate in that session and make an oral statement. *** 19. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Health and Wellness and the Krishna Institute of Medical Sciences Hospital, Hyderabad, India. The aim of the Memorandum of Understanding will be to strengthen specialised healthcare services through structured collaboration. The Memorandum of Understanding will provide for capacity building of Mauritian healthcare professionals, technical assistance for upgrading local facilities and access to advanced treatments not available in Mauritius. Moreover, it will promote cooperation in high-specialty fields such as neuro-intervention, transplantation and oncology, while ensuring continuous medical education and streamlined referral services for Mauritian patients. *** Page 9 of 14 20. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Health and Wellness and Yashoda Group of Hospitals, Hyderabad, India. The Memorandum of Understanding aims to establish a collaborative framework in order to advance several key areas of cooperation, including – (a) enhancing the capacity of Mauritian healthcare professionals; (b) implementing a Medico/Paramedic training programme; and (c) establishing a referral system for patients requiring complex medical procedures that cannot be performed in Mauritius. *** 21. Cabinet has taken note of the signing of a Treaty on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons between the Republic of Mauritius and the Republic of Kazakhstan. The Treaty sets out, inter alia, the following – (a) the general provisions for the transfer of sentenced persons, whereby the Parties may transfer sentenced persons to execute the sentences imposed by the Sentencing Party against these persons in the territory of the Administering Party; (b) the conditions for transfer include the following – (i) completion of the minimum sentence by the sentenced person; and (ii) the remaining period of time to be served by the sentenced person is at least six months; (c) the documents required to enable the transfer, including a certified copy of the judgment relating to the sentenced person, information on the type of punishment and the duration of the sentence. *** 22. Cabinet has taken note of the submission to the International Labour Organization of reports on Conventions ratified by the Republic of Mauritius, in line with Article 22 of the International Labour Organization Constitution. Mauritius has as at date, ratified 52 International Labour Organization Conventions, including 10 fundamental and two governance conventions, which are progressively incorporated into national legislation. *** 23. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the meeting of the National Steering Committee on Gender Mainstreaming recently held under the chair of the Minister of Gender Equality and Family Welfare. Page 10 of 14 The National Steering Committee on Gender Mainstreaming is a platform for Supervising Officers of Ministries and Departments to report on, coordinate, monitor and evaluate gender mainstreaming initiatives across all sectors. The main objective of the National Steering Committee on Gender Mainstreaming meeting was to review progress made by Ministries and Departments in the implementation of their respective sectoral gender-responsive actions and identify challenges being faced. The Committee also provided an opportunity to members to learn from best practices and benefit from strategic guidance to address gender gaps. *** 24. Cabinet has taken note that the Mauritius Revenue Authority will host the Tax Administration Diagnostic Assessment Tool (TADAT) Workshop from 08 to 12 September 2025. The workshop will be organised in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund under the theme “Beyond 10 Years of TADAT Assessments: Building Stronger Tax Systems for Tomorrow with the 2015 Field Guide”. The aim of the workshop is to enhance understanding of international good practices, provide insights into the updates introduced in the TADAT Field Guide 2025, facilitate discussions on global and regional trends in tax administration, and promote peer learning opportunities among tax authorities. *** 25. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Health and Wellness, in collaboration with the Hatter Cardiovascular Institute, University College London, UK, the Renal Association of Mauritius and the Cardiovascular Society of Mauritius, will hold an International Conference on “Addressing the crisis in Heart, Kidney and Metabolic Disorders” on 25 and 26 October 2025 in Mauritius. The objective of the conference is to address the crisis in heart, kidney and metabolic disorders and share evidence-based strategies which can be devised for prevention and management of cardio-renal and metabolic diseases along the life-course of an individual. The Conference aims at fostering national and international collaboration in addressing these diseases and formulating practical measures for their prevention and management. Eminent professors, experts, diabetologists, cardiologists, researchers, and epidemiologists from countries such as Australia, France, South Africa and United Kingdom will be present at the conference to deliver lectures and present case studies and research findings on cardiovascular and related diseases. Furthermore, the conference is expected to promote collaboration between different medical specialties, support the sharing of knowledge and best practices, as well as contribute to the strengthening of health systems for more effective prevention and management of non-communicable diseases. *** Page 11 of 14 26. Cabinet has taken note of the organisation of a high-level workshop on Strategic Communication, tailored specifically for Ministers, Junior Ministers, Members of Parliament, Senior Government Officials and Communication Advisors from 15 to 19 September 2025 by the Ministry of Financial Services and Economic Planning in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The workshop follows strategic discussions held with the UNDP as part of broader efforts to support the Vision 2050 and the National Development Plan, and to improve policy uptake, reform delivery, and public confidence through more effective government communication. The workshop will be led by Mr. Simon Lancaster, a globally renowned speechwriter and communication expert. The primary objectives of the workshop are to equip participants with skills to - (a) communicate persuasively and effectively in a range of scenarios; (b) communicate complex ideas quickly in a way that is credible, convincing and compelling; (c) navigate difficult discussions and communicate calmly in crisis and conflict; and (d) craft and deliver world-class speeches that inspire, influence and energise change. *** 27. Cabinet has taken note that the University of Mauritius will organise an International Conference on Recent Advances in Information Systems from 10 to 12 September 2025 in collaboration with OFFIS, a German research institute and the University of Oldenburg, Germany. The conference will provide a platform to experts from around the world to come together to share ideas and to solve problems related to information systems. The conference will focus on finding solutions to issues such as data privacy, fair access to technology and creating rules for using Artificial Intelligence responsibly. *** 28. Cabinet has taken note that L’Université des Mascareignes will organise the 5th International Conference on NanoMaterials for Health, Energy and the Environment (5-ICNM) from 07 to 11 September 2025 in Mauritius. The Conference, of a multidisciplinary nature, is being co-organised by leading international partners from France, the United States of America, Australia, Belgium and several other countries, together with L’Université des Mascareignes. Page 12 of 14 The 5-ICNM will bring together leading scientists and innovators from diverse disciplines and continents to explore cutting-edge breakthroughs in nanomaterials, foster interdisciplinary collaboration and accelerate the development of innovative and sustainable solutions for pressing challenges in health, energy and the environment. The 5-ICNM will serve as a platform to explore the latest nanomaterials with applications in medical diagnostics and treatment, renewable energy systems and environmental sustainability. It will also create the foundation for future international partnerships and the development of multifunctional smart systems tailored to regional needs. *** 29. Cabinet has taken note that on the occasion of World Maritime Day which will be celebrated on 25 September 2025, the Ministry of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries will organise an Open Day at the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre, coupled with the launching of the pre-consultative dialogues for Les Assises de l’Océan. The theme for World Maritime Day this year is “Our ocean, our obligation, our opportunity”. The commemoration of World Maritime Day 2025 will comprise, inter alia, the following activities – (a) an Open Day organised in partnership with stakeholders in the maritime industry such as the Mauritius Maritime Training Academy, Acropolis, Polytechnics Mauritius, Chantier Naval de L’Océan Indien and NGOs in the sector, to showcase career opportunities in the maritime sector; and (b) launching of Ocean Dialogues-Pre-Consultative Meetings focused on 10 themes, namely Climate Change, Biodiversity and Conservation; Blue Finance; Green Ports, Maritime Transport and Trade; Fisheries and Aquaculture and Food Security; Education, Marine Jobs, ICT and Innovations; Exploring the Ocean: Youth, Gender and Social/Awareness; Marine Renewable Energy; Applied Research, Exploration and Development in Marine Sector; Sustainable Marine Tourism; and Blue Diplomacy and Legal Framework. *** 30. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Financial Services and Economic Planning in the 20th Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) India-Africa Business Conclave jointly organised by the CII in collaboration with the Ministries of External Affairs and Commerce and Industry of India. The Conclave served as a strategic platform for advancing Africa’s development agenda and underscored the role of the India- Africa economic and trade partnership in integrating regional and global value chains. In her keynote intervention on financial partnerships and banking services, the Minister highlighted Mauritius’ role as a bridge between India and Africa, and encouraged Indian investors to leverage Mauritius as a platform for regional investment. She also promoted the implementation of the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation and Partnership Agreement and new Fintech collaborations to drive inclusive growth. Page 13 of 14 In the sidelines of the Conclave, the Minister held meetings with Indian authorities, including the Foreign Secretary, the Chairman of the Central Board of Direct Taxes, Joint Secretary of Financial Action Task Force (FATF) matters and Vice Chairperson of NITI Aayog and the Indian Venture Capital Association, focusing on the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements ratification, venture capital flows, and Anti-Money Laundering/Combatting the Financing of Terrorism cooperation ahead of Mauritius’ 2027 FATF assessment. *** 31. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Land Transport in the International Transport Summit 2025 held in Russia. The key objectives of the Summit were to establish an international expert platform and framework enabling partner cities to share their experiences in the comprehensive development and modernisation of transport systems and related digital technologies; and to collaboratively devise systematic approaches for addressing challenges in urban mobility and enhancing the quality of life in cities. The Minister held meetings with, inter alia, the Minister of Transport of the Russian Federation, the First Deputy Head of the Department of Transport and Road Infrastructure Development of Moscow, the Director of the Department of Digital Development of the Ministry of Land Transport of the Russian Federation and the Chief Executive Officer of the Compagnie Industrielle des Transports Algériens. *** 32. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Protection in the 20th Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) India-Africa Business Conclave, and the high-level meetings with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry and the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution of the Government of the Republic of India. During the Conference, the Minister intervened in three sessions, namely, ‘From Farm to Future’; ‘Sharing India’s Experience, Mobility, Logistics and Supply Chains’; and in the Valedictory Session, alongside other Ministers from Africa. He emphasised Mauritius’ position and firm commitment to strengthening itself as a key driver for India-Africa business partnerships. The Minister held a meeting with the Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution of India and his team and engaged in fruitful discussions on the Price Stabilisation Fund and Consumer Protection. The Price Stabilisation Fund is a flagship initiative of the Government of India aimed at mitigating price volatility in essential agricultural commodities, thereby protecting consumers and ensuring fair prices for producers. The Minister also held discussions with the Minister of Commerce and Industry, for expanding commercial partnerships between the two countries through Government-to-Government Agreements. *** Page 14 of 14 33. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent official visit of the Minister of Public Service and Administrative Reforms to Rodrigues. The main objectives of the visit were to take stock of the situation in the general administration of the Public Service in Rodrigues, share the projects/initiatives undertaken by the Ministry of Public Service and Administrative Reforms and also take cognisance of the main challenges so as to find ways and means as to how the Ministry could collaborate with and support the relevant Commission in Rodrigues. Meetings were held with the Chief Commissioner, Commissioners, the Acting Island Chief Executive, Departmental Heads, senior officers, staff of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly as well as the representatives of the Trade Unions. Issues relating to, inter alia, Training and Capacity Building; Public Sector Reforms; Human Resource Management; and Welfare of Public Officers in Rodrigues were discussed. *** 34. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Residential Care Homes Board, with Mrs S. Bahadoor, Permanent Secretary as part-time Chairperson. ******