Page 1 of 5 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 18 APRIL 2025 1. Cabinet has agreed to additional financial assistance being provided, for the period January 2025 to December 2026, to Export-Oriented Enterprises that are still being negatively impacted by a significant increase in their costs of production, resulting into declining export revenues. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note that HE Emmanuel Macron, President of the Republic of France would be on an official visit to Mauritius on 24 and 25 April 2025. During his visit, the French President would, inter alia, - (a) pay a courtesy call on the President of the Republic of Mauritius; (b) have a tête-à-tête with the Prime Minister; (c) participate in a Delegation Level Meeting which would comprise on the Mauritian side, the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister and other Ministers; (d) jointly open the Commission Mixte Maurice – Réunion; (e) visit the Intercontinental Slavery Museum; and (f) hold a meeting with the Mauritian, French and Reunion business communities followed by the inauguration of the French Embassy at Telfair, Moka. Cabinet has further noted that the Commission Mixte Maurice – Réunion, co-chaired by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade and Mr Manuel Valls, Ministre des Outre-Mer, would be held on 25 April 2025 in the margins of the visit of the French President. The Joint Commission between Mauritius and Reunion Island emanates from a Framework Agreement which structures the cooperation between Mauritius and Reunion Island. The issues to be addressed during the Commission Mixte include culture, tourism, biodiversity, circular economy, solid waste management and transition to green energy. Cabinet has also agreed to the signing of the following Memoranda of Understanding and Agreements during the official visit of the French President – (a) Memorandum d’entente pour la coopération dans le domaine de la conservation, de la médecine vétérinaire, de l’échange technique, du transfert de technologie, du partage de données et de la recherche sur les tortues marines; (b) Protocole d’entente, en matière de recherche, de formation et d’innovation dans le domaine de l’agriculture et de l’environment; (c) Protocole d’entente en matière de sécurité civile entre Le Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service et le Service Départemental d’Incendie et de Secours de La Réunion; Page 2 of 5 (d) Projet d’accord entre le Mauritus Tourism Promotion Authority et le Comité régional du tourisme de La Réunion sur la coopération touristique entre Maurice et La Réunion; (e) Protocole d’accord en vue d’une coopération scientifique et culturelle entre le département de La Réunion/Musée historique de Villèle et le Intercontinental Slavery Museum Mauritius Ltd; (f) Protocole d’accord en matière de Géolocalisation centrique entre le Ministère des Terres et du Logement et la Société Réseau Teria (Maurice) Ltd; (g) Accord complémentaire au Protocole précisant Ie statut particulier de la Caisse Centrale de Coopération Economique à l’île Maurice entre Maurice et l’Agence française de développement; (h) Arrangement technique entre Maurice et la France relatif aux activités conjointes de coopération entre le ministère de la défense de la République Française et le Bureau du Premier ministre de la République de Maurice; (i) Convention de mise à disposition de la «Matrice des coûts» entre l’Agence française de l'environnement et de la maîtrise de l'énergie et le ministère de l'Environnement, de la Gestion des Déchets solides et du Changement climatique et le ministère des Administration régionales; and (j) Projet de Lettre d’Intention entre Maurice et La France relatif à une coopération en matière de préservation du patrimoine architectural mauricien. A Protocole d’accord between Les Moulins de La Concorde and Soufflet Négoce by the Groupe INVIVO on the procurement of wheat would also be signed in the margins of the visit. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note of the arrangements being made by the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity for the anti-influenza vaccination exercise 2025. In accordance with the recommendations of the World Health Organization, annual vaccination against seasonal influenza would be provided to high-risk groups namely - (a) persons aged 55 and above; (b) inmates of charitable institutions and private residential care homes; and (c) children with disabilities attending specialised schools. Residents of charitable institutions, private residential care homes and children attending specialised schools would be vaccinated at their respective institutions. Persons who are entitled to domiciliary visits would be vaccinated at their place of residence by their respective visiting medical practitioners. Vaccines would also be dispatched to Rodrigues and Agalega. Page 3 of 5 The vaccination campaign would be launched on Monday 21 April 2025 for a duration of approximately one month. A calendar for the vaccination programme has been established to ensure coverage of the whole island. Details of the vaccination calendar, indicating the places, timing and dates, would be communicated to the public through the press, on MBC TV/radio and other private radio channels. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the ratification of the “Safe and Healthy Working Environment (Consequential Amendments) Convention, 2023 (No. 191)” and to the acceptance of the “Safe and Healthy Working Environment (Consequential Amendments) Recommendation, 2023 (No.207)”. Both instruments were adopted at the 111th International Labour Conference of the International Labour Organization (ILO) in June 2023. The “Proposed Actions by the Government of Mauritius” would be submitted to the ILO, in line with our obligation as an ILO Member State under Article 19 of the ILO Constitution, which requires Member States to bring the adopted instruments before the competent authority for the enactment of legislation or other action. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the acceptance of the “Quality Apprenticeships Recommendation, 2023 (No. 208)” adopted at the 111th Session of the International Labour Conference of the International Labour Organization (ILO) in June 2023. The “Proposed action by the Government of Mauritius” would be submitted to the ILO in line with constitutional obligation under Article 19 of the ILO Constitution, which requires Member States to bring the adopted recommendation before the competent authority for the enactment of legislation or other action. Necessary changes would be brought to the relevant legislation. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of the National Tabletop Exercise and Workshop on Development of a National Maritime Security Committee from 28 to 30 April 2025 in Mauritius. The workshop was being organised by the Ministry of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries in collaboration with the International Maritime Organization, in line with the European Union Port Security Programme. The Port Security and Safety of Navigation in Eastern and Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean Programme, which was coordinated by the Indian Ocean Commission and implemented by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Interpol and the International Maritime Organization aimed at enhancing maritime security and safety in the region and promoting and strengthening port security and maritime safety management systems in ports. The main objective of the programme was to encourage Member States to sign, accept and fulfil responsibilities deriving from the establishment of maritime zones as foreseen by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the International Maritime Organization, the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea and the International Ship and Port Facility Security Code. Around 30 senior officials would attend the Tabletop exercise and the Workshop. *** Page 4 of 5 7. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of a Capacity-Building Workshop co-organised by the Ministry of Tertiary Education, Science and Research, the International Science, Technology and Innovation Centre for South-South Cooperation under the auspices of UNESCO and the Mauritius National Commission for UNESCO from 21 to 25 April 2025 in Mauritius. The Capacity-Building Workshop entitled “Leading Beyond Borders - Mastering Global Diplomacy, Strategic Alliances and Impactful Leadership” aimed at providing participants with leadership capabilities to navigate unique challenges faced by international organisations; developing advanced diplomacy and negotiation skills for multilateral contexts; strengthening strategic thinking and planning to align organisational goals with global priorities; optimising resource management, fundraising and stakeholder engagement and promoting the adoption of co-creation principles for impactful and sustainable initiatives. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Agro- Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries in the 29th session of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission meeting in Saint Denis, Reunion Island. The Indian Ocean Tuna Commission was set up with the objective of promoting cooperation among the contracting parties (members) and non-contracting parties of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission with a view to ensuring, through appropriate management, conservation and optimum utilisation of tuna stocks covered by its establishing Agreement. In the margins of the Meeting, the Minister had discussions with the Minister of Fisheries of the Republic of Seychelles and the French Minister of Ecological Transition, Biodiversity, Forestry, Sea and Fisheries. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity in the Third Global Disability Summit in Berlin. The Summit served as a key platform for building global consensus, renewing commitments, and accelerating progress on the implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. The Minister participated in sessions focusing on inclusive employment, climate change and resilience, inclusive education systems, social protection and financing, technology and innovation for independent living, as well as disaster risk reduction and conflict response. The sessions offered deep insights into global trends, policy innovations, and best practices being implemented in both developed and developing countries. The Minister had the opportunity to meet with the Federal Minister for Economic Cooperation and Development of Germany, the President of the Higher Council for the Rights of Persons, the President of the International Disability Alliance, Ministers from Barbados, Nigeria, the United Kingdom, Eswatini, Malawi, Nigeria as well as Ministers from the Francophone African Countries. He also held bilateral meetings with the Minister of Persons with Disabilities and Vulnerable Groups of the Democratic Republic of Congo and with the representatives of delegation from Kenya and Fiji. *** Page 5 of 5 10. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the 39th Council of the Indian Ocean Commission in Victoria, Seychelles. The Council of Ministers was held in preparation of the 5th Heads of State and Government Summit of the Indian Ocean Commission to be held on 24 April 2025 in Madagascar. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Junior Minister of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries in the 11th session of the Africa Regional Forum on Sustainable Development (ARFSD) in Kampala, Uganda. The overall objective of the Regional Forum was to follow up on and review the progress made towards the achievement of the Sustainable Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the aspirations, goals and targets of Agenda 2063 - The Africa We Want, of the African Union by 2030. The Junior Minister participated as a panelist in the session on “Ocean Preservation and Sustainable Use” and chaired a panel discussion on “Life below water”, whereby participants reflected on African progress towards the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal 14. During the 11th session of the ARFSD, election of the new bureau of the Regional Forum was held, with a mandate of one year. The new Bureau had been constituted with Uganda as chair and Mauritius as first vice-chair. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the – (a) appointment of Mr France Christophe Lactive, as Vice-President of the Redundancy Board; (b) reconstitution of the Clinical Research Regulatory Council, with Dr Rajendranath Goordoyal, as part-time Chairperson; (c) reconstitution of the Board of the Bus Industry Employees Welfare Fund, with Mr Ballenden Brian Tandrayen as part-time Chairperson; and (d) reconstitution of the Mauritius Film Development Board, with Mr Ramanand Mattadeen as part-time Chairperson. ******