Page 1 of 5 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 11 JULY 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note that, with a view to balancing the need for social cohesion and economic resilience and assisting the most vulnerable, adjustments to the Pensions Reform had been agreed the previous week through the provision of, inter alia, a monthly income support of Rs10,000 to the most vulnerable who will reach the age of 60 years as from 01 September 2025. Cabinet has further noted that with a view to supporting economic growth – (a) the Fair Share Contribution on High-Income Earners and on Corporates has been adjusted and clarified taking into account the need for our jurisdiction to attract foreign investments and talents; and (b) some grandfathering and moratorium will be provided for more certainty to the property market. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Financial Crimes Commission (Amendment) Bill into the National Assembly. The object of the Bill is to empower the Financial Crimes Commission and the Police to conduct a joint investigation into an offence under the Financial Crimes Commission Act 2023. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note that, in accordance with section 87 of the Constitution, the Prime Minister has advised the President of the Republic to appoint – (a) Mrs Sheilabai Bappoo, GOSK, as High Commissioner of the Republic of Mauritius to the Mauritius High Commission, New Delhi, Republic of India, with residence in New Delhi; (b) Mr Munsoo Kurrimbaccus as High Commissioner of the Republic of Mauritius to the Mauritius High Commission, Islamabad, Islamic Republic of Pakistan, with residence in Islamabad; (c) Mr Reza Gunny as Ambassador of the Republic of Mauritius to the Mauritius Embassy, Cairo, Arab Republic of Egypt, with residence in Cairo; (d) Mrs Maria Francesca Mireille Martin as High Commissioner of the Republic of Mauritius to the Mauritius High Commission, Pretoria, South Africa, with residence in Pretoria; Page 2 of 5 (e) Mr Indrarjeet Babooa as Ambassador of the Republic of Mauritius to the Mauritius Embassy, Addis Ababa and Permanent Representative of the Republic of Mauritius to the African Union Commission in Addis Ababa, Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, with residence in Addis Ababa; and (f) Mr Joёl Marie Rault as Ambassador of the Republic of Mauritius to the Mauritius Embassy, Paris, Republic of France, with residence in Paris. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note that Mrs Nandita Devi Suneechur, Acting Director of the Education and Prevention Division of the Financial Crimes Commission, has been elected as a member of the African Union Advisory Board Against Corruption (AUABC) for a term of six years. The AUABC is an 11-member autonomous Organ set up within the framework of the African Union Convention on Prevention and Combatting Corruption. The AUABC is tasked with the responsibility to advise on and address corruption and related themes in Africa. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius signing the “Agreement Amending the SADC Treaty to recognise the SADC Parliament as one of its Institutions (2022)”. The Agreement seeks to formally establish the SADC Parliament as an institutional platform for dialogue among Parliamentarians of SADC Member States. It aims to enhance regional cooperation, promote democratic governance, and support the implementation of SADC’s common regional agenda, including through the formulation and adoption of model laws, among other activities. *** 6. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Tertiary Education, Science and Research and the Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine of the United Kingdom. The Memorandum of Understanding will focus on collaboration in the fields of public health education, scientific cooperation, capacity building, training and research. The following activities of mutual interest will be initiated and developed – (a) joint research and educational activities in various fields including public health, primary care and healthcare management; (b) setting up and development of a public health education and research hub in Mauritius to assist in promoting knowledge mobilisation and ensuring capacity building in the SADC region; (c) exchange of teaching and research documentation between the Mauritian public higher education institutions and research communities, and various university departments of the Imperial College; Page 3 of 5 (d) exchange programmes for faculty members for research, lectures and academic discussions; and (e) collaboration between the public universities, higher education institutions and authorities of Mauritius and the Imperial College in the field of teaching, training, research and consultancy. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to the Open University of Mauritius renewing a Memorandum of Understanding with the University of Gävle, Sweden. The collaboration between both universities stems from shared commitment to advancing open and distance learning, research collaboration, and academic exchanges. A series of exchanges for students and staff as well as PhD supervision have been undertaken under the previous Memorandum of Understanding. The purpose for the renewal of the Memorandum of Understanding is to further strengthen institutional ties through mutual cooperation in higher education and research. The main areas of cooperation include – (a) research collaboration between staff of the Open University of Mauritius and the University of Gävle; (b) cooperation in developing and supervising new research projects; (c) project supervision for PhDs, Bachelors’ and Masters’ programmes; (d) conducting seminars and workshops; (e) student exchange; and (f) double degree programme. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note of the implementation of the Africa Regional Resilience Initiative on Climate Education (ARRICE) Project by the Mauritius Institute of Education in 25 primary and secondary pilot schools in Mauritius and Rodrigues. The ARRICE project is designed in accordance with African Union’s ‘Agenda 2063 - The Africa We Want’, emphasising the transformative role of education in achieving sustainable development. The objectives of the project are, inter alia, to – (a) create and disseminate quality, free and open educational resources to the selected schools to develop transdisciplinary understanding of climate change and its environmental, social and economic dimensions and promote critical thinking and action-oriented behaviours; Page 4 of 5 (b) support the professional development of primary and secondary school teachers to enhance the integration of climate change education practices; (c) promote school and community-led initiatives fostering transformative climate change actions; and (d) initiate a strategy and build partnerships with educational authorities to integrate quality climate change education in education systems at both the national and regional levels. The ARRICE project will be implemented by the Office for Climate Change in collaboration with the Mauritius Institute of Education as the leading organisation and Reef Conservation which will be responsible for mobilising schools and communities through the Eco-Schools network to ensure the effective design, implementation and evaluation of the Project. *** 9. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius holding the ClimSA International Training Workshop on Climate Risk Information for Climate Action, from 23 to 26 September 2025 in Mauritius. The theme of the workshop is “Understanding Hazard Assessment using tools such as Climpact and Climate Information Portal”. The Climate Services & Related Application (ClimSA) Programme is an initiative of the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States (OACPS) and funded by the European Union. Its objectives are to provide members and regions of the OACPS with innovative and collaborative solutions to manage climate-related risk considerations in their sustainable development policy, planning and practice decisions. The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is supporting the implementation of two activities for the Mauritius Meteorological Services notably for establishing the use of national user interface platforms for selected priority sectors and development of a national climate services production chain for climate-informed decision-making. The WMO in collaboration with the Indian Ocean Commission, will conduct the workshop to address the training needs of the Mauritius Meteorological Services. *** 10. Cabinet has agreed to the holding of the Regional Workshop on the Sendai Monitoring Framework Reporting for Target G (Early Warnings) from 29 to 31 July 2025 in Mauritius. The workshop forms part of the Sendai Monitoring Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction which focuses on strengthening social and economic resilience to disasters caused by natural hazards and climate change. The Regional Workshop forms part of the broader Early Warnings for All initiative and aims to strengthen national capacities of countries in reporting on Early Warning Systems under the Sendai Framework. The objectives of the workshop are to - Page 5 of 5 (a) provide an orientation on the Sendai Framework Monitor, its functionality, and reporting procedures; (b) engage participants in hands-on training for reporting on Target G, which aims at substantially increasing the availability of and access to multi- hazard early warning systems by 2030, covering key aspects such as the data cycle, reporting mechanisms, and inputting data for various indicators; and (c) facilitate informed discussions to support robust reporting under the Sendai Framework, and conduct a reporting clinic to significantly enhance data availability for Target G. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note that the University of Mauritius in collaboration with the World Trade Organization and the International Centre for Sustainable Tourism and Hospitality, will organise the 13th International Research Symposium in Service Management (IRSSM) from 15 to 18 July 2025 in Mauritius. The IRSSM is a globally renowned platform that brings together academics, researchers and practitioners to explore and advance the field of service management. With a strong emphasis on collaboration and knowledge-sharing, IRSSM serves as a hub for innovative ideas, cutting-edge research and meaningful dialogues addressing contemporary challenges in service industries. The symposium will provide participants with a platform for networking and exchanging ideas by focusing on the transformative potential of AI advancements in the service industry. The event will promote ideas aiming at fostering a broader exchange of knowledge and perspectives in service research. The symposium will bring together scholars, professionals and practitioners from various disciplines and countries providing them with a unique forum for sharing the latest theories and practices prevalent in the service economies. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note that the Board of Directors of the Metro Express Ltd has resolved to appoint Mr Rishikesh Brojmohun, an architectural and engineering consultant, as Chief Executive Officer of Metro Express Ltd. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Jewellery Advisory Council, with Mrs Sadhna Sokhal as part-time Chairperson. ********