Page 1 of 5 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 15 JULY 2022 1. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change issuing drafting instructions to the Attorney General’s Office for an Integrated (Solid and Hazardous) Waste Management Bill with a view to providing strategic direction and guidance towards sustainable solid and hazardous waste management practices in line with the concept of circular economy. The main object of the Bill would be to ensure the environmentally safe and sound management of solid and hazardous wastes by adopting a circular economy approach focusing on material recovery and recycling for a sustainable waste management system. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the setting up of the Central Medical Procurement Office under the aegis of the Ministry of Health and Wellness for the procurement of medical supplies, including drugs or medicines, vaccines, equipment, consumables and medical disposables for public health institutions in Mauritius. Drafting instructions would be conveyed to the Attorney General’s Office. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Education (Amendment No.2) Regulations 2022 which would amend Regulation 24 of the Education Regulations which provides for specific cut-off dates for obtention of qualifications, submission of applications and documents for the ‘Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam National Scholarships’ and ‘State of Mauritius Scholarships’. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note that the CITES and Wildlife (Prescribed Species) Regulations 2022 would be promulgated under the Native Terrestrial Biodiversity and National Parks Act. The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) is an international agreement between governments to regulate or ban international trade of species under threat. Its aim is to ensure that international trade in specimens of wild animals and plants does not threaten the survival of the species. The Regulations would be effective as from 1 August 2022. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the Economic Development Board (EDB) signing a Memorandum of Understanding with Business France. Business France would provide its technical assistance, advisory, training and coaching services for the capacity building of EDB in its core missions while the EDB would provide relevant information and opportunities on the business environment to wider foreign direct investment, exports and market development initiatives, promotional events, publications and other initiatives. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the signing of a tripartite Memorandum of Understanding between the Corporate Business Registration Department, the Financial Services Commission Page 2 of 5 (FSC) and the Economic Development Board for the establishment of a co-operative framework with a view to setting up a ‘Single-Window System’. The FSC would be setting up a dedicated and exclusive counter for the ‘Single-Window System’ at its premises. The counter would serve as an information desk to potential investors and act as a centre facilitating the applications for relevant licences, permits and certificates, including Occupational Permits and Certificate of Incorporation. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius supporting the “International Declaration on Transnational Organized Crime in the Global Fishing Industry”. The main objective of the Declaration is to promote cooperation between relevant governmental agencies at the national, regional and international levels for the prevention, combating and eradication of transnational organised crime in the global fishing industry. The Declaration also encourages supporting countries to work towards the fulfilment of the UN Sustainable Development Goals particularly in relation to Goal 14 on “Life Below Water” and Goal 16 on “Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions.” *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that Mauritius has ranked 28th in the 2022 Global Peace Index. Each year, the Institute for Economics and Peace releases the Global Peace Index. It is a study of 163 independent nations and territories around the world. Mauritius has been designated as the most peaceful country in Sub-Saharan Africa. *** 9. Cabinet has agreed to a new policy for the recruitment of foreign players and coaches by the Super League and the national First and Second divisions clubs of team sports, namely Football, Basketball, Handball, Rugby and Volleyball. *** 10. Cabinet has agreed to the refund of National Savings Fund contributions to non-citizens each time they leave Mauritius upon expiry of their employment contract. Amendments would be brought to the National Savings Fund (Claims and Payment) Regulations accordingly. This measure would be effective as from July 2022. *** 11. Cabinet has agreed to the mandate of the Mauritius Multisports Infrastructure Ltd being extended so as to, inter alia, cater for the organisational and logistic aspects of major sporting and recreational events to be held in Mauritius. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the list of Public Holidays for the Year 2023, which is as follows – Page 3 of 5 New Year - Sunday 01 January New Year - Monday 02 January Chinese Spring Festival - Sunday 22 January Abolition of Slavery - Wednesday 01 February Thaipoosam Cavadee - Saturday 04 February Maha Shivaratree - Saturday 18 February Independence and Republic Day - Sunday 12 March Ugaadi - Wednesday 22 March Eid-Ul-Fitr** - Saturday 22 April Labour Day - Monday 01 May Ganesh Chaturthi - Wednesday 20 September All Saints Day - Wednesday 01 November Arrival of Indentured Labourers - Thursday 02 November Divali - Sunday 12 November Christmas - Monday 25 December ** The exact date of this festival is subject to confirmation as its celebration depends on the visibility of the moon. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the status regarding the implementation of the Premium Visa regime as at 30 June 2022. Some 2,869 applications were received from mid-November 2020 to 30 June 2022, out of which – (a) 2,008 applications have been approved; (b) 258 applications have not been entertained for not fulfilling the required criteria; (c) 556 applications were incomplete and awaiting for missing documents; and (d) 47 applications were set aside as applicants were no longer interested in the Premium Visa scheme. Page 4 of 5 *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the situation of the COVID-19 pandemic prevailing across the world. Some 564.3 million cases have been reported globally, of which 536.3 million persons have been successfully treated. With regard to Mauritius, as at 13 July 2022, there were 306 active cases of COVID-19, out of which 42 were admitted at the New ENT Hospital. Over the period 07 to 13 July 2022, one death was attributed to COVID-19. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note that the fifth Meeting of the Steering Committee of the Commonwealth Climate Finance Access Hub (CCFAH) would be held on 03 August 2022 in Mauritius. A High-Level Breakfast Meeting would also be held on 04 August 2022 in the distinguished presence of The Rt Hon Patricia Scotland QC, Secretary General of the Commonwealth. *** 16. Cabinet has taken note that Mr Noa Bibi has established two national records in athletics, namely for 100m and 200m, in France recently. *** 17. Cabinet has taken note of the participation of the Minister of Financial Services and Good Governance in the Special Session of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) States – European Union (EU) Joint Parliamentary Assembly held virtually. The special session was dedicated to the EU list of Non-Cooperative Jurisdictions for tax purposes and the list of Third Countries for Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism. Mauritius, as chair of the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States (OACPS) Ad Hoc Contact Group on the EU List of Non-Cooperative Tax Jurisdictions and that of Third Countries regarding Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism, was invited to intervene in the Special Session by the OACPS Council. *** 18. Cabinet has taken note that the Regional Office in Eastern Africa of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) through the UNODC Global Maritime Crime Programme would launch their first Regional Judges’ Colloquium on Maritime Crimes in Mauritius from 27 to 29 July 2022. The UNODC Global Maritime Crime Programme supports Member States, through its mandate, to develop capacity throughout the entire criminal justice chain of serious crimes within the maritime domain. The meetings would be conducted by Judge Maurice K. Kamga who is a sitting Judge at the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. *** Page 5 of 5 19. Cabinet has taken note that the Utility Regulatory Authority (URA) has received an application for the review of electricity tariffs. Public Notice would be issued in the press by the URA on 16 and 18 July 2022. The URA would hold meetings with representatives of key stakeholder institutions (consumer associations and the business community) between 18 and 22 July 2022. *** 20. Cabinet has taken note that the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Services has informed all petrol service stations that the validity of their existing Fire Certificates was being exceptionally extended until end of August 2022 with a view to ensuring the smooth running of business operations. The National Land Transport Authority would also inform the holders of the Petrol Service Station Licence that a delay of up to 31 August 2022 has been exceptionally granted for the renewal of their Licence and that the penalty fee of 50 percent would not be applicable until 31 August 2022. *** 21. Cabinet has taken note that Dr Alvario Lario has been elected as President of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) during the First Special Session of the Governing Council of the International Fund for Agricultural Development held recently. ******