Page 1 of 3 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 21 JULY 2023 1. Cabinet has taken note of the progress achieved in the drafting of a new Fisheries Bill. The new Bill aims at, inter alia, reinforcing the existing systems and measures in order to deter, prevent and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Education, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology acceding to the “Manifeste pour une diplomatie scientifique francophone”. The “Manifeste” was adopted during the “6e Conférence des Ministres en charge de l'Enseignement supérieur et de la recherche”, organised by the Agence Universitaire de la Francophonie. The main objectives of the “diplomatie scientifique francophone” are to – (a) consolidate scientific cooperation at all levels of the education system, from primary to tertiary level, by mobilising knowledge in the francophone space; (b) strengthen political and scientific networking, through linking the higher education sector to policy makers; (c) promote the francophone scientific expertise and publications; and (d) institutionalise the mobility of francophone skills. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note that on 18 July 2023, the European Union Comité des Représentants Permanents des Gouvernements des Etats membres de l’UE decided to sign the post-Cotonou Agreement. This decision was adopted by the European Union Council on 20 July 2023 as a procedural requirement. European Union Member States had initiated their internal procedures for the signature of the Post Cotonou Agreement so that the signing ceremony may take place in Samoa at the earliest. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note of the implementation of the project “Accelerating the Greening of the Manufacturing Sector for a Sustainable Mauritius” by the Ministry of Industrial Development, SMEs and Cooperatives with the financial assistance of the Global Environment Facility and the technical support of the United Nations Environment Programme. The project aims at accelerating the greening of the manufacturing sector through a carbon neutral development pathway. It would contribute to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions, decrease dependency on fossil fuels, increase adoption of green and sustainable initiatives, and uptake of renewable energy technologies as well as promote the use of circularity practices through material efficiency and waste minimisation at enterprise level.The main components of the project include the conduct of energy audits in manufacturing enterprises, the conduct of material audits in manufacturing enterprises and the setting up of a funding mechanism, namely the ‘Green Manufacturing Scheme’. *** Page 2 of 3 5. Cabinet has taken note that Mauritius had won for the first time, one silver and two bronze medals at the Paris 2023 Para Athletics World Championships. Ms Noemi Alphonse, MSK won the silver medal in the 100m (T54) and the bronze medal in the 400m (T54). Mr Yovanni Phillippe had set a new world championship record in the semi- final of the 400m (T20) with an impressive time of 47s38. He won a bronze medal in the 400m (T20) final. *** 6. Cabinet has agreed to the hosting of the 27th Southern Africa Regional Climate Outlook Forum (SARCOF 27) from 21 to 31 August 2023, in Mauritius in collaboration with the Southern African Development Community Secretariat. The main objective of the SARCOF 27 events was to produce the forecast for the 2023/24 rainfall season as this would improve the contribution of all the National Meteorological/Hydrological Services to the early warning and disaster preparedness and would also ensure better management of hydro- graphical basin and power dams. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the Indian Ocean Wave Exercise for the year 2023 (IOWave23) being organised during the month of October 2023 by the Intergovernmental Coordinating Group for the Indian Ocean Tsunami Warning and Mitigation System of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO (IOC-UNESCO). The IOWave23 would comprise tsunami simulation exercises for the National Tsunami Warning Centre or Disaster Management Offices to test preparedness in responding to tsunamis generated by seismic events or volcanoes. Community level preparedness would also be evaluated as well as the IOC-UNESCO Tsunami Ready Recognition Programme indicators. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that the Secretariat of the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) would organise a Ministerial meeting of the Surveillance épidémiologique et gestion des Alertes (SEGA) One Health in Mauritius on 14 September 2023. The objectives of the Ministerial meeting would be to – (a) consolidate the acquis of the SEGA-One Health framework; (b) discuss its sustainability through the proposed setting up of the SEGA Fund; and (c) define a regional IOC health strategy. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note that as at 19 July 2023, there were 14 active cases of COVID-19, out of which four were admitted at the New ENT Hospital. Over the period 13 to 19 July 2023, no death was attributed to COVID-19. *** Page 3 of 3 10. Cabinet has taken note that with regard to cases of Dengue in Mauritius and Rodrigues, the situation was being monitored closely. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by the Human Rights Division of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade to mark World Humanitarian Day 2023. The World Humanitarian Day is commemorated on 19 August every year to honour and recognise the dedicated efforts of humanitarian workers worldwide, raise awareness about their crucial role, and advocate for their safety and protection as they risk their lives to help others in need. ***