Page 1 of 4 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 13 JUNE 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note that the President of the Republic and the Prime Minister had, on behalf of the Government and the people of Mauritius, conveyed condolences and heartfelt sympathy to the families and loved ones of the victims of the tragic crash involving an Air India aircraft on 12 June 2025. The Acting Prime Minister also expressed his sympathy to the High Commissioner of India in Mauritius and requested the latter to convey condolences to the Indian Government. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note of the Issuer Comment published by Moody’s on 10 June 2025 outlining the proposed fiscal strategy of Government contained in the Budget 2025-2026. In its report, Moody’s emphasised that the Budget 2025-2026 set ambitious consolidation paths but execution risks remained. However, if Government’s budget expectations are realized over this fiscal year and beyond, fiscal deficit is expected to narrow, resulting in a declining debt burden. Cabinet further noted that an Inter-Ministerial Committee chaired by the Acting Prime Minister met on 10 and 12 June 2025 to address concerns raised by various stakeholders on some measures announced in the Budget Speech 2025-2026. A Special Meeting of Cabinet would be held on Monday 16 June 2025 on that matter. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note of the progress of measures undertaken in connection with the resumption of activities on Ile aux Bénitiers. The list of operators has been finalised by the District Council of Black River in consultation with the Collectif Citoyen, and activities will resume on Monday 16 June 2025. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius hosting the Second Meeting of the High- Powered Joint Trade Committee, under the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation and Partnership Agreement (CECPA) between Mauritius and India in July 2025. Mauritius and India have been implementing the CECPA since 01 April 2021. The Agreement covers three key areas, namely Trade in Goods, Trade in Services, and Economic Cooperation. It provides for preferential market access for key Mauritian products in India, including sugar, rum, garments, canned tuna, and medical devices, as well as for a number of services sectors such as financial, professional, and educational sectors. Mauritius and India are committed to strengthening collaboration in sectors such as biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, and agriculture, to further deepen bilateral economic relations. *** Page 2 of 4 5. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius undertaking the final stage of tariff liberalisation in the context of the Mauritius-China Free Trade Agreement regarding goods exported by the People’s Republic of China to Mauritius for the year 2025. The Mauritius-China Free Trade Agreement entered into force on 01 January 2021. The Agreement is China’s first Free Trade Agreement in the African region and aims at deepening economic and trade relations between the two countries. The Mauritius-China Free Trade Agreement comprises four main components, namely Trade in Goods, Trade in Services, Investment and Economic Cooperation. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the review of the Republic of Mauritius, by the Committee against Torture under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. In its concluding observations, the Committee, inter alia, commended Mauritius for the adoption of the Government Programme 2025-2029 “A Bridge to the Future” and expressed appreciation in regard to the legislative amendments being brought through the Constitution (Amendment) Act 2025 and the Criminal Code (Amendment) Act 2025. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the review of the Republic of Mauritius, by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination under the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. In its concluding observations published on 09 May 2025, the Committee welcomed the legislative, institutional and policy measures taken by Mauritius. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note of the formulation of the Health Sector Strategic Plan 2025-2030 by the Ministry of Health and Wellness. The Strategic Plan would be prepared in collaboration with the World Health Organization with the objective of ensuring Health for All and improving the delivery of patient-centred services. The Plan would be developed to serve as the central strategic framework for guiding the health sector over the next five years. It would provide a structured and coordinated approach to addressing the priority health needs of Mauritius. The Strategic Plan would incorporate the health-related priorities of the Government Programme 2025-2029 and would focus, inter alia, on the following critical areas - (a) management of Non-Communicable Diseases, particularly diabetes and its complications, in line with international recommendations; (b) strengthening the provision of quality, patient-centred health care; (c) addressing emerging concerns, including medical negligence and the safety of health personnel; Page 3 of 4 (d) resolving human resource challenges in the health sector through evidence-based strategies; and (e) advancing the Primary Health Care approach with a focus on efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery. *** 9. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries hosting the 13th Session of the Working Party on Collaboration and Cooperation in Tuna Fisheries of the South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (SWIOFC) on 17 and 18 June 2025 in Mauritius. The mandate of the Working Party on Collaboration and Cooperation in Tuna Fisheries was to contribute to making significant progress in the SWIOFC work programme, which was instrumental to the development of the Minimum Terms and Conditions Guidelines which had been implemented at regional level, thereby establishing a common access regime for foreign fishing vessels of tuna and tuna-like species in the SWIOFC region. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of a national training workshop on the compilation of trade in services statistics in the Information, Communication and Technology sector from 14 to 16 July 2025 in Mauritius. The national workshop would be organised by the International Trade Centre through technical assistance under the African Trade Observatory Trade in Services component. The objective of the workshop was to enhance the capacity of national stakeholders in collecting and processing trade in services data for the ICT services sector and increase the data availability based on the Extended Balance of Payments Classification of Services in line with the recommendations of the Manual on Statistics on the International Trade in Services. The workshop would provide participants valuable insights into the methodologies and best practices necessary for compiling high quality trade in services statistics. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of National Infrastructure in the Sustainable Infrastructure Development Symposium 2025 (SIDSSA 25) held in South Africa on the theme “Building Resilient Communities”. The SIDSSA 25 brought together political leaders, government officials, the G20 countries, infrastructure funding bodies and industry experts. It explored strategic approaches for sustainable infrastructure development in the African continent. The SIDSSA 25 focused on ways of promoting infrastructure development in a sustainable manner with a view to strengthening the African economy, creating employment and increasing gross fixed capital formation. Page 4 of 4 Several discussion panels were held and brought together Ministers responsible for infrastructure development from across the African continent. During his intervention, the Minister laid emphasis on the need for African countries to foster stronger relationships, cooperation and sharing of know-how so as to boost regional integration. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the 2025 Annual Meetings to the African Development Bank Group and the 60th Annual Meeting of the Board of Governors held in Côte d’Ivoire. The Minister chaired the Constituency Meeting which was attended by the Ministers of Finance from Zambia, Malawi and Botswana, respectively. The objective of the meeting was to hold discussions on the agenda of the 2025 Annual Meetings and to build consensus on matters of interest. During the Governor’s Dialogue held under the theme “Positioning Africa’s youth to drive an inclusive, resilient and sustainable development”, the Minister shared the best practices of Mauritius in creating synergistic ecosystems for the professional and personal development of youth and young people. In the sidelines of the 2025 Annual Meetings, the Minister had a bilateral meeting with the Minister of Economic, Planning and Development of Côte d’Ivoire. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the 24th Meeting of the Council of Ministers of the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) held virtually. The Minister delivered the country statement on the theme “Sustainable Indian Ocean for Future Generations” and underscored the Government of Mauritius’ unwavering commitment to sustainable development, as outlined in the Government Programme 2025-2029. He emphasised the importance of strengthening regional partnerships to promote peace, sustainability, and shared prosperity within the Indian Ocean region. The Council took note that Mr Sanjiv Ranjan had assumed office as Secretary General of the IORA on 01 January 2025 for a three-year term. The Council welcomed the European Union as the 12th IORA Dialogue Partner. The Council adopted the IORA Guidelines on Combating Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing to promote sustainable fisheries management in the region. The Council endorsed the IORA Climate Change Strategic Agenda, which advocates for a regional approach to the escalating threats posed by climate change. *****