Page 1 of 9 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 17 OCTOBER 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note that on 12 October 2025, following an application made by Jet Prime Limited, a subsidiary of Airport Holdings Ltd, on behalf of Trans Ocean Airways, permission was granted by the Department of Civil Aviation for the operation of a private flight from Madagascar to Mauritius for tourism purposes. The plane landed at 0044 hours with five passengers on board, including the former Malagasy Prime Minister, one businessman and two crew members. The aircraft had departed from Madagascar without obtaining the flight clearance from the Department of Civil Aviation prior to departure, and without filing a flight plan, which are against the provisions of the Mauritius Aeronautical Information Publication issued under regulation 135 of the Civil Aviation Regulations. The permission to land was issued, after receiving clearances from the Passport and Immigration Office and Airports of Mauritius Co. Ltd, and taking into account the low level of fuel reported by the pilot, in the interest of safety and in accordance with the International Civil Aviation Organisation recommended practices. The Secretary to Cabinet and Head of the Civil Service has carried out an in-depth investigation on the circumstances surrounding the incident. The Acting Director of Civil Aviation has referred the matter to the Police for enquiry as it is felt that a criminal offence might have been committed by the pilot who failed to submit an application to the Director of Civil Aviation not less than 10 hours before the intended flight. The Police will then seek the advice of the Director of Public Prosecutions on whether there should be any prosecution on the basis of the findings of their enquiry. The former Prime Minister and one of the pilots have already left Mauritius while the businessman, Mr Maminiaina Ravatomanga is still in Mauritius and is the subject of an inquiry by the Financial Crimes Commission. The procedures for the operation of private flights by the Department of Civil Aviation are being reviewed in view of the new non-routine challenges that the Civil Aviation is encountering. The operations of Jet Prime Ltd are also being reviewed. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Court of Rodrigues Jurisdiction (Amendment) Bill into the National Assembly. The object of the Bill is to amend the Court of Rodrigues Jurisdiction Act with a view to extending the application of the Children’s Court Act 2020 to Rodrigues. Accordingly, the Magistrate for Rodrigues will have jurisdiction to hear and determine cases which, in Mauritius, would be cognisable by the Protection Division and the Criminal Division of the Children’s Court. *** Page 2 of 9 3. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the National Pensions (Continuation of Benefits) Regulations 2025, which will provide for, inter alia, - (a) beneficiaries proceeding abroad for medical treatment to continue to receive their pensions provided that prior to their departure or not later than three months after the date of departure, the beneficiary returns to Mauritius, an application is put up to the Medical Tribunal, established under the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity, accompanied by documentary evidences. The beneficiary will receive his pension provided that the Medical Tribunal is satisfied that the beneficiary will undergo, or has undergone medical treatment abroad for a maximum period of 12 months, renewable in exceptional circumstances provided he justifies the extension; (b) beneficiaries proceeding abroad for studies to continue to benefit from their pension provided that they put up an application to the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity accompanied by documentary evidence, certifying that they are following or will follow a full-time course abroad in an institution recognised by the Higher Education Commission or the Mauritius Qualifications Authority; and (c) beneficiaries of Basic Retirement Pension who stay abroad for more than six months but not more than 12 consecutive months, to continue to benefit from their pension, once in their lifetime, provided that they put up an application to the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity - (i) one month prior to their departure; or (ii) not later than six months after their departure for the continuation of their benefit; or (iii) not later than three months after the date they return to Mauritius for payment of arrears of their benefit. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity conveying drafting instructions to the Attorney-General’s Office to amend section 9 of the Protection of Elderly Persons Act 2005, which pertains to elderly persons’ protection orders and the preparation of the Ombudsperson for Elderly Bill. With the growing ageing population and rise in the number of cases of elderly abuse and neglect, the following amendments to section 9 of the Act are proposed – (a) to make provision for every person witnessing an abuse on an elderly, to have the duty to report such act either to the Police or the Elderly Persons’ Protection Unit; (b) to empower the Police to provide necessary and reasonable assistance to an elderly person to prevent an act of abuse; Page 3 of 9 (c) to grant officers of the Elderly Persons’ Protection Unit powers of entry on any premises housing elderly persons, including residential care homes, charitable institutions or a personal abode, if a case of abuse has been reported; (d) to allow officers of the Elderly Persons’ Protection Unit to make applications for protection orders on behalf of elderly persons living in residential care homes or charitable institutions who have been victims of abuse; (e) to allow the alleged perpetrator to make an appeal against the Protection Order; (f) to decrease the timeframe requiring the alleged abuser to appear before the Court from 14 days to 7 days instead; and (g) to prescribe the forms for Information on Oath, Protection Order and Interim Protection Order by way regulations pursuant to section 12 of the Act. Furthermore, with a view to establishing the Office of an Ombudsperson for Elderly, the Ombudsperson for Elderly Bill will be prepared. The Ombudsperson for Elderly will be responsible to – (a) ensure that the rights, needs and interests of elderly persons are given full consideration by public bodies, private authorities, individuals and associations of individuals; (b) promote the rights and interests of elderly persons; and (c) promote compliance with the United Nations Principles for Older Persons. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Youth and Sports proceeding with a review of the National Youth Council Act 1998, which provides for the establishment, functions, and operations of the National Youth Council. The Ministry of Youth and Sports will undertake stakeholder consultations with national and regional youth organisations, as well as community groups across Mauritius and Rodrigues. These will include meetings, focus group discussions, and written submissions from stakeholders and the public through of the Ministry’s website. The objectives of the consultations are to – (a) assess the relevance and effectiveness of the current provisions of the Act; (b) gather inputs from a wide range of stakeholders, including youth organisations, Non-Governmental Organisations, student unions, regional bodies, and government agencies; and (c) identify necessary amendments to strengthen the inclusiveness, representativeness, and accountability of the National Youth Council. *** Page 4 of 9 6. Cabinet has agreed to financial assistance being provided to the Parish of St Jean for the rehabilitation and repair of the damaged tombs of the St Jean Cemetery following the flooding events which occurred between 08 November 2023 and 14 January 2024. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note that, on 14 October 2025, the 80th Session of the United Nations General Assembly elected Mauritius as member of the Human Rights Council for the term 01 January 2026 to 31 December 2028. Mauritius was elected with 181 votes, the highest amongst the 14 elected members. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that Mauritius has been re-elected as Vice-Chair of the Southern African and Islands Hydrographic Commission. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note that the Public Officers’ Welfare Council will hold the 30th Edition of the Civil Service Kermesse on Sunday 30 November 2025, from 09 00 hours to 17 00 hours at the Gymkhana Grounds, Vacoas. *** 10. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Health and Wellness signing a Convention on la Formation Anesthésie Réanimation Médecine Péri-opératoire 2023-2027 with the University of Mauritius, the University of Bordeaux, the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Bordeaux, the University of Reunion and CHU Reunion. The objective of the Convention is to establish a structured framework of cooperation between the different institutions for the implementation of the postgraduate training programme in Anesthesia, Critical Care and Peri-operative Medicine, with a view to ensuring the availability of qualified anaesthetists to meet national healthcare service requirements. The Convention provides for the development of specialised course, aligned with the French Diplôme d’Études Spécialisées model, to enhance the professional capacity of Mauritian medical officers in the field through a clinical collaboration which includes exchange of expertise and supervised clinical placements in Mauritius and France. *** 11. Cabinet has agreed to the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre signing a Memorandum of Understanding with the Embassy of the United States of America for the operation and maintenance of the American Maker Space, which was setup at the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre in 2023. The objective of the American Maker Space is to promote the understanding of Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics among students in the age group of 14 to 18 years. The Memorandum of Understanding will enable the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre to – Page 5 of 9 (a) strengthen international collaboration in the fields of Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics; (b) introduce innovative and internationally benchmarked extra-curricular activities to Mauritian youngsters; and (c) increase the visibility of the Centre at the international level, especially in the United States of America, given that it is already affiliated to the Association of Science and Technology Centers. *** 12. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Record of Discussions between the Ministry of Industry, SME and Cooperatives and the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for the implementation of the ‘Project to Disseminate the Kaizen Approach in the Republic of Mauritius and Neighbouring Countries’. The objective of the project, funded by JICA, is to strengthen the capacity of the National Productivity and Competitiveness Council (NPCC) to become a Center of Excellence for the dissemination of Kaizen in Mauritius and neighbouring countries. Through this initiative, JICA will reinforce NPCC’s expertise to effectively assess the needs of organisations (both in private and public sectors), to develop customised training courses and successfully drive the dissemination of Kaizen activities in those organisations. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Education and Human Resource is collaborating with the Mauritius Telecom Limited for the implementation of the mytGPT Educational Platform Pilot Project. The mytGPT Education is an Artificial Intelligence (AI)- powered platform designed to support students, teachers, and parents across the education system. The integration of AI in education is progressing rapidly globally, with demonstrated benefits in enhancing teaching outcomes, enabling personalised learning pathways, and improving student engagement. The initiative aims at creating a more personalised, accessible, and resilient education system by enabling learners and educators to access high-quality content anytime, anywhere. The project also aligns with the broader national strategy of leveraging AI as a transformative tool to drive greater efficiency, productivity, and innovation across all sectors of the Mauritian economy. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the internal arrangements being made at the level of the Ministry of Land Transport, in consultation with the Police Department, ahead of the expiry, on 01 March 2026, of the moratorium granted to holders of Provisional Driving Licences (Learner) for autocycle/motorcycle. According to the Regulations in place, within the validity period, the learner rider of motorcycle must complete Part 2 of the practical riding test (on-road test) to obtain a competent licence, failing which, he should start over for a fresh application for a provisional licence for motorcycle. Page 6 of 9 The Ministry of Land Transport will issue a Press Communiqué to remind holders of Provisional Driving Licences (Learner) for autocycle/motorcycle that those licences which were obtained prior to 01 March 2018 and subsequently renewed, will remain valid until 01 March 2026. Holders of Provisional Driving Licences who could not obtain a valid licence by 01 March 2026, will be informed that they will be able to apply for a new Provisional Driving Licence for autocycle/motorcycle and secure an appointment for a practical riding test, against payment of the prescribed application fee of Rs500. The Provisional Driving Licence (Learner) for autocycle/motorcycle is valid for a period of six months and is renewable. *** 15. Cabinet has agreed to the establishment of an International Advisory Committee on Diabetes and Cardiovascular Diseases, which will support the implementation of evidence- based treatment strategies tailored to the specific needs of the Mauritian healthcare system. The key objectives of the International Advisory Committee will be to – (a) provide specialist guidance to the Ministry of Health and Wellness on the prevention and management of cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and related complications, including kidney disease; (b) facilitate partnerships with international experts and institutions, thereby strengthening Mauritius’ position in global health research and innovation; and (c) support the advancement of health research, contribute to the development of evidence-based policies, and assist in enhancing national healthcare strategies. The Committee will comprise up to 11 members, including four local experts and up to seven internationally recognised professionals in health, medicine, research or innovation. *** 16. Cabinet has taken note that the Mauritius Revenue Authority will host the Tobacco and Excise Tax Training from 27 to 31 October 2025 in Mauritius. The training programme will be organised by the African Tax Administration Forum (ATAF), in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the World Bank, the World Health Organization (WHO), the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the University of Cape Town. The training will specifically focus on tobacco and excise taxation, with the objective of strengthening the technical capacity of African tax administrations to design and implement effective excise regimes on tobacco products supporting both enhanced domestic resource mobilisation and improved public health outcomes across the continent. Around 90 participants comprising senior officials and technical experts from ATAF member administrations from 29 countries are expected to participate in the training, along with representatives of UNDP, World Bank and WHO. *** Page 7 of 9 17. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of a workshop for Green Cells by the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change in collaboration with the Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities and the Ministry of Public Service and Administrative Reforms to, inter alia, sensitise on the need for energy reduction/saving initiatives in the Public Sector with a view to implementing the Action Plan for the ‘Greening of the Public Sector’ project. The objective of the ‘Greening of Public Sector’ project is to encourage public organisations and institutions to green their day to day activities through the adoption of sustainable consumption and production patterns, resource efficiency and smart green practices. The focus of the workshop will be geared towards energy saving/reduction across the public sector given the energy crisis that the country is facing. In addition, the workshop will aim at raising awareness on the green practices and initiatives for the energy sector and ensuring better engagement of members of the Green Cells in the implementation of energy saving measures in their organisations. *** 18. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Public Service and Administrative Reforms will hold a one-day open discussion forum for the elaboration of a Strategic Framework for Public Service and Administrative Reforms 2025-2029. The Ministry of Public Service and Administrative Reforms is currently working on the elaboration of a Strategic Framework for Public Service and Administrative Reforms 2025– 2029. The Framework will be a pivotal initiative which aims at supporting the national vision of Government to build a modern, agile, transparent, resilient and citizen-centric Public Service, while fostering a Whole-of-Government approach to eliminate inefficiencies and promote accountability and value-addition in service delivery. The Framework will be based on key Pillars, namely Administrative Reforms and Innovation, Capacity Building, Digitalisation and Public Service Policies and Strategies. The Strategic Framework will also comprise a Public Service Delivery Index, which would be a crucial measuring tool to continuously monitor progress and performance and address inefficiencies in a timely manner. *** 19. Cabinet has taken note of the participation of the delegation from Mauritius, led by the Minister of Labour and Industrial Relations, to the advisory proceedings before the International Court of Justice held at The Hague, on whether the right to strike of workers and their organisations is protected under Convention “C087 Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention 1948 (No. 87)” of the International Labour Office. Page 8 of 9 In his statement, the Minister spoke about the evolution of the right to strike and freedom of association in Mauritius and reaffirmed Mauritius’ stand that the right to strike is protected under the Convention but is a qualified right. He also submitted that the Convention must be interpreted in line with Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, and that the term “activities” in the Convention included strike action and other industrial actions without the need to exhaustively and expressly list the activities. He also highlighted that Articles 8 and 9 of the Convention allow the right to strike to be regulated by domestic laws and to exclude armed forces and the police. *** 20. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Tourism in the 25th edition of the World Travel & Tourism Council (WTTC) Global Summit 2025 held in Italy, on the theme “The Great Beauty of Travel”. The aim of the Summit was to provide a platform for global leaders from the public and the private sector to exchange views on the future of travel and tourism, with particular emphasis on sustainable growth, responsible investment, innovation, and seamless travel. The WTTC Report on the Future of the Travel & Tourism Workforce was released during the Summit. The Summit closed with the reaffirmation of the role of Travel & Tourism as a driver of growth, job creation and innovation. The WTTC stressed that its future activities will continue to focus on competitiveness, sustainable investment and public-private collaboration to build a resilient and inclusive global tourism sector. The Minister had meetings with the Ministers of Tourism of Italy, Portugal and Malta. *** 21. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Junior Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the 17th meeting of the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) Council of Ministers held in Egypt. The meeting addressed several issues including market access/trade liberalisation, rules of origin, trade in services, competition policy and digital trade amongst others. The 17th meeting of the AfCFTA Council of Ministers adopted two draft regulatory frameworks pertaining to the financial services and communication services, respectively. With respect to competition policy, the Council of Ministers adopted the following documents - (a) Terms of Reference of the Committee of the Heads of Competition Authorities; (b) regulation on the composition and modalities of functioning of the AfCFTA Competition Tribunal; and (c) regulation on the establishment of the AfCFTA Competition Network. The Junior Minister met the Secretary General of the AfCFTA Secretariat in the margin of the Council of Ministers meeting to discuss the proposal to organise a roadshow on the AfCFTA in Mauritius in March 2026. He also met the Secretary of State in charge of Foreign Trade of the Kingdom of Morocco. *** Page 9 of 9 22. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the - (a) Executive Council of the Telugu-Speaking Union, with Dr Shailendra Yenkanah as President; (b) Council of the National Co-operative College, with Mr Issop Khan Abdoolakhan as part-time Chairperson; (c) Board of the Public Officers’ Welfare Council, with Mrs Asha Koonjul as part- time Chairperson; and (d) Board of the Statutory Bodies Family Protection Fund, with Mrs S.D. Gujadhur- Nowbuth, Permanent Secretary, as part-time Chairperson. ******