Page 1 of 2 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 08 APRIL 2022 1. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction into the National Assembly of the Beach Authority (Amendment) Bill. The main object of the Bill is to amend the Beach Authority Act so as to broaden the functions and powers of the Beach Authority with regard to the management and control of public beaches within the islands comprised in the State of Mauritius. --- 2. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Energy Efficiency (Labelling of Regulated Machinery) (Amendment) Regulations 2022 with a view to allowing import of excisable appliances which have been tested in accordance with the new EU Commission Delegated Regulations. The new Regulations will, inter alia, allow - (a) for test methods in product certification to be either in accordance with Mauritian standards or the EU Commission Delegated Regulations; and (b) MSB to issue a report if it is satisfied that a regulated machinery complies with the corresponding Mauritian standards or the EU Commission Delegated Regulations. --- 3. Cabinet has taken note that the Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development would promulgate the Finance and Audit (Rodrigues Subsidy Account) (Amendment) Regulations 2022 to allow the remittance of surplus of funds from the Rodrigues Subsidy Account into the Consolidated Fund as is the case for Statutory Bodies, in line with recommendations of the National Audit Office. --- 4. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of Mauritius for the recruitment, employment, and repatriation of qualified and trained workers from India. --- 5. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Housing and Land Use Planning granting to the Chagos Refugees Group an agricultural lease over a plot of State land at Pointe aux Sables for fruit and food crops cultivation purposes. --- Page 2 of 2 6. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Youth Empowerment, Sports and Recreation would organise an Education and Job Meetup for the benefit of the youth on 09 and 10 April 2022 at the Côte d’Or National Sports Complex. The objective of this event is to provide a platform where the youth can interact with representatives from local training institutions and private companies to gain better insights into working in a specific industry and guidance towards appropriate higher studies that they might wish to pursue and which are in line with their career aspirations. The launching of this event is scheduled on 08 April 2022 at the Côte d’Or National Sports Complex. --- 7. Cabinet has taken note of the situation of the COVID-19 pandemic prevailing across the world. Some 495.4 million cases have been reported globally, of which 431.3 million persons have been successfully treated. Cabinet has also noted that countries which have lifted or eased sanitary measures some weeks back have witnessed an increase in the number of new cases although hospitalisation and death rates remain low. With regard to Mauritius, as at 06 April 2022, there were 828 active cases of COVID- 19, out of which 14 were admitted at the New ENT Hospital. Over the period 31 March to 06 April 2022, six deaths were attributed to COVID-19. Cabinet has also taken note of progress in the COVID-19 Vaccination Programme, including the administration of the booster dose in the Republic of Mauritius. As at 07 April 2022, 1,005,882 persons had received a first dose of vaccine (representing 79.4 percent of the population). 971,251 persons were fully vaccinated (representing 76.7 percent of the population). 606,096 persons had received a booster dose (representing 47.9 percent of the population). 76.3 percent of adolescents aged 12 to 17 years had received a first dose of vaccine and 69.6 percent had received a second dose. --- 8. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Board of the Fashion and Design Institute for the period 2022 to 11 February 2024, with Mr Sunael Singh Purgus as part-time Chairperson. --- 9. Cabinet has taken note of the constitution of the Mauritius Emerging Technologies Council with Dr Suraj Juddoo, as part-time Chairperson. ----