Page 1 of 10 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 19 SEPTEMBER 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the State Visit of the Prime Minister to India from 09 to 16 September 2025 at the invitation of HE Mr Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic of India. The Prime Minister led a high-level delegation comprising several Ministers, public and private stakeholders along with senior government officials. The Prime Minister will hold a Press Conference on Saturday 20 September 2025 to give full details of the State Visit. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Private Recruitment Agencies Regulations 2025 with a view to modernising the regulatory framework so as to align with the International Recruitment Integrity System principles which promote fair and ethical recruitment practices to better protect jobseekers. The Regulations will make the following new provisions, among others, with a view to professionalising the operations of recruitment agencies and strengthening protection of jobseekers – (a) issue of a separate licence for each of the three categories of recruitment; (b) applicants shall demonstrate that their directors or senior officers have technical knowledge and experience in the field of recruitment of workers and are conversant with the labour laws applicable in Mauritius and in the country where the work is to be performed; (c) applicants shall have sufficient financial resources and an adequate capital structure to serve as a continuing source of financial support for the licensee; (d) the applicant, its shareholders, directors and senior officers shall not have been involved in any unethical recruitment and convicted of any offence related to the recruitment of workers, fraud or dishonesty; (e) for contract of employment entered into between an employer and a citizen for employment in Mauritius, to be governed by the Workers’ Rights Act, the applicable remuneration order, and collective agreement, and any other relevant employment related legislation; (f) the licensee shall shoulder the responsibility of repatriation of a worker not found fit for the job employed for; (g) where a licensee is required to repatriate a citizen from abroad but refuses to do so, his security deposit shall be forfeited and the Ministry of Labour and Industrial Relations shall use that security amount to repatriate the citizen; Page 2 of 10 (h) the Regulations will not be applicable to the National Employment Department and the Mauritiusjobs Platform or any such electronic platform of the National Employment Department; and (i) staff of the Ministry of Labour and Industrial Relations to conduct inspections as and when required to ensure that all recruitment agents are operating in compliance with the legislation. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Environment Protection (Banning of Plastic Bags) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 and the Environment Protection (Control of Single Use Plastic Products) (Amendment No. 2) Regulations 2025 which provide for amendments with regard to the definition for plastic, biodegradable plastic bags and compostable plastic bags. The Regulations provide for amendments regarding the wording petroleum- based materials or their derivatives in the definition for plastic, by a list of 14 polymers derived from petroleum-based materials. The definition for plastic bag will also be amended to include provision that such plastic bags do not meet the requirement of the international standards for biodegradability or compostability in the Third Schedule in order to ensure a clear demarcation from a biodegradable or a compostable plastic bag. The definition for biodegradable plastic bag and compostable plastic bag will be amended by deleting the existing provision that such bags do not contain petroleum- based materials or their derivatives. Two additional home compostable standards will also be introduced in the Third Schedule with the objective of having a proper disposal mode for such bags in compost bins. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Consumer Protection (Use of Liquefied Petroleum Gas in Small Cylinders) (Amendment No. 2) Regulations 2025 to provide visual distinction of domestic Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) Cylinders weighing 12kgs from commercial ones. An obligation will be imposed on all LPG suppliers and distributors to adopt clear and visible differences between domestic and commercial cylinders. The Regulations provide that these differences may be introduced through consistent colour coding or permanent labelling. The markings must be clearly visible and uniformly applied across the supply chain. The Regulations will come into operation in April 2026, allowing LPG suppliers and distributors sufficient time to comply with the new legal requirements. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Agreement between the Government of Mauritius and the Corporate Council on Africa whereby both parties agree to jointly organise and host the 18th US-Africa Business Summit in 2026, with Mauritius as host country. *** Page 3 of 10 6. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius donating USD50,000 to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) following an appeal from the UN Secretary General for Member States for collective support to implement its mandate in 2025 and beyond. The donation will complement Government’s actions taken in support of Palestine, including – (a) our votes in 2024 and 2025 in favour of UN General Assembly resolutions and UNESCO decisions supporting the mandate of UNRWA; and (b) Mauritius endorsing the “New York Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine and the Implementation of the Two-State Solution”, which includes a commitment to support UNRWA’s mandate, inter alia, through appropriate funding. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries issuing drafting instructions to the Attorney-General’s Office for a new Forests and Reserves Bill, which will repeal and replace the Forests and Reserves Act. The main provisions of the draft Bill will include, inter alia, the – (a) introduction of a clear definition of key terms to provide better protection to forests and rivers and prevent any ambiguity at enforcement stage; (b) establishment of a Forest Inventory; (c) classification of various types of reserves and the types of activities that would be permitted therein; (d) recognition of hill reserves, particularly to cater for Rodrigues Island; (e) protection of individual trees bearing historical, socio-cultural and/or environmental significance; (f) setting-up of a Forest Advisory Council which would replace the Nature Reserves Board; (g) setting-up of a Rodrigues Forest Advisory Committee; (h) establishment of a National Forestry Office, which shall replace the Forestry Service and the Conservator of Forests, respectively; (i) signature of Forest Management Agreements; and (j) strengthening of enforcement mechanisms. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note of the World Intellectual Property Organisation's release of the Global Innovation Index 2025. Mauritius has secured the 53rd position globally out of 139 economies, representing an improvement from last year's 55th ranking. Mauritius strengthened its position as the number one innovation nation in Sub- Saharan Africa whilst advancing within the upper-middle income group from 9th to 6th position. Page 4 of 10 The Global Innovation Index 2025 reveals that Mauritius is well-positioned to capitalise on emerging global trends that favour agile and stable economies with strong institutional frameworks. *** 9. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries signing a Project Document with the Food and Agriculture Organization for the provision of technical assistance for the implementation of a project entitled “Strengthening abandoned, lost or otherwise discarded fishing gear management for cleaner oceans in the Western Indian Ocean”, which will be funded by the Government of Japan and implemented in collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization. Mauritius is one of the key beneficiary countries under this regional initiative, which seeks to improve the management of end-of-life fishing gear and marine plastic waste, while fostering sustainable fisheries and circular economy principles. The project will strengthen the capacity of fishing communities and private operators to collect, sort and pre-process recovered abandoned, lost or other discarded fishing gear and end-of-life fishing gear, including associated gear components and enhance technological innovation in fishing operations, which will consequently reduce environmental impact and improve safety and profitability. The project’s interventions will be guided by – (a) Public-Private Partnerships; (b) Market Development; (c) Awareness Raising and Knowledge Transfer; (d) Capacity Building of Fisheries Managers, Port Authorities and Environmental/Waste Management Governmental Agencies and introduction of best practices to prevent and reduce Abandoned, Lost or other Discarded Fishing Gear at national level, with focus on occupational safety and health; and (e) Legislative and Management Measures. *** 10. Cabinet has agreed to the Higher Education Commission implementing the Blueprint on Micro-Credentials in Higher Education, entitled “A blueprint on Micro- Credentials in Higher Education: From Concept to Execution”. The Blueprint provides a structured and strategic framework for the development, implementation and scaling of micro-credentials across higher education institutions in Mauritius. In line with Government’s vision to position Mauritius as a global education hub, the Blueprint supports innovation in education, enhances workforce readiness, and ensures micro-credentials are credible, portable and globally recognised. The objectives of the Blueprint are to – (a) ensure compliance with relevant regulatory requirement; Page 5 of 10 (b) enhance lifelong learning, enabling learners to make informed choices to undertake micro-credentials at their own pace and place; (c) establish a national definition for micro-credentials that determines the responsiveness and range of learners, higher education providers and employers and encourages harmonisation between the three; (d) provide specific guidance on critical information and requirements for all micro-credentials to maximise transparency and consistency; and (e) set and agree on unifying principles for all stakeholders including providers, employers and learners, for the development and delivery of micro-credentials. *** 11. Cabinet has agreed to amendments being brought to the Information and Communication Technologies Act, by way of regulations, to create a new licence, namely the Mobile Number Portability (MNP) Service Provider Licence; and the Information and Communication Technologies (Licensing and Fees) Regulations 2003 to cater for the fees payable by a MNP Service Provider. The MNP will enable subscribers to switch from one mobile telecommunication service provider to another while retaining their mobile numbers. *** 12. Cabinet has agreed to the Data Protection Office signing a Memorandum of Understanding with the Computer Emergency Response Team of Mauritius (CERT- MU) and the Mauritius Police Force regarding the operation of a Digital Forensic Laboratory. The Memorandum of Understanding provides a framework for cooperation, including exchange of information between the parties for the creation and operation of a Digital Forensic Laboratory at the Data Protection Office to enhance the investigation of digital evidence handling, while ensuring adherence to data protection principles and other related legal requirements. The Memorandum of Understanding provides for collaboration in the following areas – (a) establishment of the Digital Forensic Laboratory which will be the main hub for analysing digital evidence in data protection cases; (b) sharing of resources and tools through promotion of mutual cooperation to avoid duplication of efforts and maximise the use of specialised equipment in their respective laboratory; (c) conducting joint investigations and assisting each other in investigations that require specialised analysis and handling of digital evidence; (d) engaging into capacity building and training through the provision of technical assistance by each party or entering into cost-sharing arrangements; Page 6 of 10 (e) enhanced adherence to legal and ethical standards by having the commitment of all parties in ensuring that all activities they undertake adhere to applicable laws, regulations and international best practices, particularly with regard to data protection; (f) engaging into ongoing and regular communication to efficiently address matters of mutual interest; and (g) having periodic reviews of the collaborative arrangement to resolve any issues and improve its overall effectiveness. *** 13. Cabinet has agreed to the University of Mauritius, in collaboration with the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) and the World Trade Organisation Chairs Programme, organising an International Conference on International Trade and Investment on 25 and 26 September 2025 in Mauritius. The theme of the conference is “Trade and Investment Facilitation in the IORA Region.” The main objective of the conference is to facilitate the sharing of knowledge, experiences and information on international trade and investment among participants with focus on IORA Member States experience. The conference will, inter alia, – (a) reinforce the role of Mauritius as a gateway for trade and investment into Africa, leveraging its strategic location and established financial services sector; (b) enhance trade facilitation by encouraging the adoption of best practices in customs procedures and regulatory compliance by improving the efficiency of trade operations; (c) promote economic diversification by facilitating discussions on emerging sectors such as fintech and renewable energy, aiding in the diversification of the Mauritian economy; and (d) help to strengthen regional and international relations by fostering collaboration with regional organisations and international stakeholders and enhancing Mauritius’ diplomatic and economic ties. *** 14. Cabinet has agreed to the Higher Education Commission organising an International Conference on the Potentials of Micro-Credentials in Southern Africa (POMISA) from 14 to 16 October 2025 in Mauritius. The POMISA Project is a collaborative venture, designed to strengthen higher education and workforce development across the Southern African region. It is a pivotal initiative, financed by the European Union, uniting esteemed universities from Africa and Europe together with regulatory authorities and key industry stakeholders, seeking to harness the transformative capabilities of micro-credentials. The objectives of the POMISA Conference are to – Page 7 of 10 (a) share the results of research and pilot programmes conducted as part of the POMISA project; (b) facilitate discussions around the future role of micro-credentials in education and workforce development; (c) highlight best practices and innovative approaches from sectors such as technology, healthcare, and the green economy as these global insights; and (d) create a platform for knowledge exchange and collaboration between Southern Africa and Mauritius, further strengthening Mauritius’ position as a regional hub for innovation and higher education. *** 15. Cabinet has agreed to the Higher Education Commission hosting the African Continental Qualifications Framework (ACQF) Forum, in collaboration with the European Training Foundation, from 30 September to 02 October 2025 in Mauritius. The ACQF is a strategic initiative led by the African Union (AU) to establish a unified framework for qualifications across the African continent. It aims to enhance the comparability, quality, and transparency of qualifications, thereby facilitating lifelong learning, mobility of learners and workers, and mutual recognition of diplomas and certificates among African nations. The ACQF Forum aims to serve as a platform for promoting regional collaboration and bring together AU Member States, regional qualifications authorities, and international partners. The Forum will provide Mauritian Higher Education Institutions and regulatory bodies with direct access to knowledge exchange, training, and best practices from across the continent. The event will, furthermore, serve as a capacity building opportunity for local stakeholders since it will provide them with insights on the strategies required to strengthen their own qualifications framework and quality assurance mechanisms. *** 16. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries, in collaboration with the International Maritime Organization (IMO), will host the National Legal Review Workshop on Maritime Security from 29 September to 02 October 2025 in Mauritius. The main objectives of the workshop are to support Mauritius in drafting and reviewing national legislation to ensure full and effective transposition of IMO maritime security instruments, strengthen inter-agency cooperation and coordination mechanisms for maritime and port security, build national capacity in legal and operational aspects of maritime security and ensure compliance with international maritime security obligations. Page 8 of 10 The workshop falls under the European Union funded “Safe Seas for Africa” initiative whereby particular attention will be given to the national level maritime security set-up, with activities targeting the national information sharing centres, national law enforcement agencies and judiciary systems in place. *** 17. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC) Eastern Africa Regional Workshop on Non- Communicable Diseases (NCDs), Injuries, and Mental Health from 29 September to 03 October 2025 in Mauritius. The Africa CDC is a specialised technical institution of the African Union with the mandate to promote the prevention and control of diseases in Africa. It recognises the significance of the increasing burden of these conditions in Africa, as reflected in its Non-Communicable Diseases, Injuries Prevention and Control and Mental Health Promotion Strategy 2022-2026. The strategy aims at bringing all Africa Union/Africa CDC policies together in a set of strategic actions to support Member States in implementing activities for the prevention and control of NCDs, injuries and mental health promotion, towards achieving Agenda 2063 and the Africa Health Strategy. Africa CDC is organising the Eastern Africa Regional Non-Communicable Diseases, Injuries Prevention and Control and Mental Health programme peer review, assessment and support workshop. The workshop will bring together Non- Communicable Diseases, Injuries Prevention and Control and Mental Health technical leads from Kenya, Comoros and South Sudan to jointly assess their existing national action on Non-Communicable Diseases, Injuries Prevention and Control and Mental Health and identify challenges and strategies to address priority needs, drawing on the expertise of peer reviewers. *** 18. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of a workshop by the Ministry of Information Technology, Communication and Innovation in collaboration with the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR), with relevant local stakeholders for the drafting and finalisation of the national position on International Law in Cyberspace. UNIDIR offered support to Mauritius in developing a national position on the applicability of International Law in Cyberspace. Such national positions define how a country applies existing legal principles, such as sovereignty, non-intervention, and prohibition of force to cyber activities. The workshop will aim at bringing together key national stakeholders to contribute in the drafting of the National Position on International Law in Cyberspace. This initiative will enable Mauritius to strengthen its role in shaping a secure, stable, and predictable digital environment while safeguarding national interests. The development of a National Position on International Law in Cyberspace will complement Mauritius’ obligations under the recently adopted United Nations Page 9 of 10 Convention against Cybercrime, by reinforcing both state-level security and effective law enforcement cooperation. *** 19. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity, in collaboration with the National Empowerment Foundation (NEF) to mark the International Day of the Eradication of Poverty 2025, namely – (a) a Symposium on “Pauvreté - Quel seuil déterminant?” on 16 October 2025, providing a platform to around 200 stakeholders, including representatives from Ministries, institutions, academia and Non- Governmental Organisations to make an assessment of the poverty situation in Mauritius, taking into account the evolving socio-economic context; (b) a drawing and painting showcase on 18 October 2025 providing children from NEF beneficiary families with a creative stage to express their realities, hopes and aspirations. It will also help to raise public awareness on the challenges of children living in poverty through the medium of art; (c) three-days’ market fair from 16 to 18 October 2025 at Port Mathurin for around 30 beneficiaries on the Social Register of Mauritius who became small entrepreneurs, following training programmes imparted by the NEF to exhibit and sell their products; and (d) online testimonies of laureates. Two success stories will exemplify how structured social support, when combined with determination and hard work, can transform lives and empower families to break the cycle of poverty. These activities will provide an opportunity to raise awareness about poverty, emphasise the need for inclusive policies to uplift marginalised communities and ensure equal opportunities for all. *** 20. Cabinet has taken note of the launching of Special Commemorative Cover on the occasion of World Tourism Day 2025, which is celebrated on 27 September every year. The theme of this year’s celebration is ‘Tourism and Sustainable Transformation’. *** 21. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Junior Minister of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries in the 2nd Sustainable Maritime Industry Conference 2025 in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. Page 10 of 10 The Junior Minister attended the Inter-Ministerial session on “Leadership Perspectives on Sustainable Future of Maritime Industry” and expert panels on the following topics, namely – (a) Maritime Decarbonisation - Energy Efficiency in Shipping: Pathways for Emissions Reduction; (b) Maritime Digitalisation, Automation and Cybersecurity; (c) Regulatory Framework and Capacity Building; and (d) Sustainable Marine Environment Practices. In the margins of the conference, the Junior Minister met the representatives of the Saudi Global Ports and the National Maritime Academy. Furthermore, the Junior Minister paid a courtesy call on the Vice Minister of Transport & Logistic Services and Acting President of the Transport General Authority. *** 22. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Education and Human Resource in the UNESCO’s Flagship Digital Learning Week at the UNESCO Headquarters in France. The Minister attended the Ministerial roundtable organised during the event on the theme “AI and the future of education: Disruptions, dilemmas and directions” and delivered a statement in which he highlighted that Mauritius is fully committed towards integrating its AI Strategy into the educational system, with a view to aligning with global digital trends and ensuring a future ready society. The Minister also participated in a Plenary Panel entitled “Exploring ethics and explainability at scale”. His intervention focused on the fairness and transparency of AI technologies in learning as well as the respect of privacy by learners using AI. In the sidelines of the Digital Learning Week, the Minister had the opportunity to network with a number of high dignitaries to explore future opportunities for collaboration, including the Chief of the Small Island Developing States Section, the Permanent Delegate of India to UNESCO, the Administrator of the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie and the Director of the Institut de la Francophonie pour L’education et la formation. ********