Page 1 of 4 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 21 JUNE 2024 1. Cabinet has agreed to the renewal of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Health and Wellness and Artemis Medicare Services Limited (AMSL), India. The aim of the Memorandum of Understanding would be, inter alia, to refer Mauritian patients for overseas treatment and cater for capacity building of healthcare professionals. The AMSL would also provide additional support to the Ministry of health and Wellness as follows - (a) technical assistance in connection with the E-Health project and the setting up of an autologous Bone Marrow Transplant Unit; (b) off-the-job observership training programmes in India to eligible and selected paramedical personnel in the different clinical operations; (c) setting up of a Mauritian Patient Helpdesk at AMSL and creation of a Whatsapp group to address all queries of Mauritian Nationals referred by the Ministry of Health and Wellness; and (d) continuous medical education for Mauritian doctors during the visit of Artemis Consultants. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Health and Wellness, the Medical Council of Mauritius, the Dental Council of Mauritius and the Mauritius Examinations Syndicate would renew the Memorandum of Agreement with the National Board of Examinations in Medical Sciences, India, with regard to the conduct of the Medical Registration Examination and the Dental Registration Examination. A Memorandum of Agreement was entered with the National Board of Examinations in Medical Sciences, India, in October 2013 with a view to conducting the Medical Registration Examination and the Dental Registration Examination, prior to the registration of Medical and Dental Practitioners with their respective Councils in Mauritius. *** 3. Cabinet had taken note of the establishment of a Public Health Emergency Operations Centre spearheaded by the Ministry of Health and Wellness in order to prevent, detect and respond to public health threats in an effective and structured manner, in compliance with protocols in place. Page 2 of 4 The Public Health Emergency Operations Centre would constitute a hub for effective harmonisation of information and resources during emergencies and would be called upon to bring together multi-sectoral and multidisciplinary experts to coordinate preparedness and response efforts to disease outbreaks and other public health emergencies, using a Standard Emergency Management System developed by the World Health Organization. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security, Le Morne Heritage Trust Fund and Absa Bank (Mauritius) Limited signing a Memorandum of Understanding for the restoration of the native forest at Pas Géométriques Labonte, situated at Le Morne. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the second Voluntary National Review (VRN) report of Mauritius being forwarded to the High-Level Political Forum for submission to the United Nations Secretariat. The VRN is voluntary and is part of the follow-up and review mechanism established by the United Nations to monitor the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The 2024 VNR report, which is in line with national priorities, highlights, inter alia, progress made in the implementation of the SDGs in Mauritius, the resilience of the Mauritian economy, and refers to gaps and challenges encountered in the implementation of the SDGs. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note that the Environment Act 2024, which repeals the Environment Protection Act, would be proclaimed and be effective as from 01 August 2024. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by the Prime Minister’s Office in collaboration with the Ministry of Education, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology to commemorate the International Day Against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking on 26 June 2024. A carnival on the theme ‘Drug prevention saves lives - Prevansion ladrog sov lavi’ would be organised at Côte d’Or National Sports Complex with the participation of around 2,000 students from secondary schools. Page 3 of 4 In addition, the Ministry of Health and Wellness would also organise the following activities - (a) opening of a “One Stop Shop” at Dr Yves Cantin Community Hospital for the medical arrangement and follow up of People Who Use Drugs with associated comorbidities such as Hepatitis C and HIV; (b) a workshop on strengthening the capacity of healthcare workers in drug demand reduction; (c) sensitisation of the population on the dangers of illicit drugs through talks on MBC radio and TV; and (d) a dedicated programme of “Priorité Santé” on MBC TV on the ill-effects of drug abuse and the range of drug-related services available in health institutions. Furthermore, the Ministry of Youth Empowerment, Sports and Recreation jointly with the Mauritius Recreation Council, the National Youth Council and the Mauritius Sports Council would organise a one-day recreational, fun sports and leisure activities for young people aged between 15 to 25 years old on Sunday 30 June 2024 in the 21 regions across the Republic of Mauritius with the participation of around 6,000 young people. The objectives of these activities would be to - (i) engage young people in fun sports, recreational and leisurely activities so as to divert them from the temptations of substance abuse, illicit trafficking and other social ills; and (ii) enlist the participation of young people in meaningful activities to help them boost their self-esteem, self-confidence and have a positive attitude in society. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised to mark the International Day of Cooperatives 2024 which is celebrated on the first Saturday of the month of July yearly. The theme chosen for this year’s celebration by the United Nations and the International Cooperative Alliance is “Cooperatives Build a Better Future for All”. The Ministry of Industrial Development, SMEs and Cooperatives would organise, inter alia, the following activities - (a) a wreath laying ceremony at Les Jardins de la Compagnie, Port Louis, together with the Mauritius Cooperative Alliance Ltd, on Thursday 04 July 2024; (b) a gathering of co-operators at the Indira Gandhi Centre for Indian Culture, Phoenix, on Saturday 06 July 2024; and Page 4 of 4 (c) dedicated programmes on MBC TV and radios, with a view to highlighting the contribution of cooperatives towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and the various schemes put in place by Government to promote the development of the cooperatives sector. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note that, as at 20 June 2024, there were 61 active cases of Dengue Fever in Mauritius, of which six persons had been hospitalised in both public and private hospitals. For Rodrigues, nine active cases of Dengue Fever had been recorded and two persons were hospitalised. Cabinet further noted that since 11 January 2024, 54 cases of Leptospirosis had been reported in Mauritius and three persons had been hospitalised as at 20 June 2024. The Ministry of Health and Wellness was pursuing the sensitisation campaign on Leptospirosis in collaboration with relevant stakeholders. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Human Resource Development Council with Mr Luc Alain Gunness Balnock, as part-time Chairperson for a period of two years. ******