Page 1 of 3 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 21 FEBRUARY 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note that His Excellency Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic of India, will be the Chief Guest for the National Day Celebrations 2025. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Prime Minister in the 38th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the African Union held in Addis Ababa. The theme adopted by the Summit “Justice for Africans and People of African Descent Through Reparations” was of direct relevance to the struggle to exercise the sovereignty of Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago. In his statement, the Prime Minister gave an account of some of the measures that Mauritius had taken to redress the negative impact of slavery and indentured servitude in Mauritius. The Prime Minister expressed his gratitude to the African Union for its unwavering support in the long struggle for the exercise of sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. Mr Louis Olivier Bancoult, GCSK, Chairperson of the Chagossian Welfare Fund, who had fought relentlessly for the rights of the Chagossians, was part of the Mauritian delegation. The Prime Minister pointed out that Africa cannot be fully decolonised until and unless the Chagos Archipelago is fully restored under our sovereignty. In his address to the Summit as one of the newly elected Heads of State and Government, the Prime Minister pointed out that democracy, good governance and integrity would be the bedrock on which Mauritius would be rebuilt. He highlighted the fact that the Government Programme 2025-2029 which centred around People, Planet and Prosperity mirrors in many ways the African Agenda 2063, more particularly in terms of inclusive and sustainable development for our people. He also paid tribute to late President Sam Nujoma of Namibia. The Summit took cognisance of various Reports pertaining to the activities of the Peace and Security Council and the state of peace and security in Africa. The Summit elected Mr Mahmoud Ali Youssouf of Djibouti as the new Chairperson of the African Union Commission and Ambassador Mrs Selma Malika Haddadi of Algeria as Deputy Chairperson. In the margins of the Summit, the Prime Minister had a number of bilateral meetings with, inter alia, the President of the Union of Comoros, the President of Madagascar, a number of Heads of State and Government including those of Algeria, Botswana, Djibouti, Kenya and Mauritania, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Director-General of the World Trade Organisation, the Chief Executive Officer of Ethiopian Airlines, the President of the African Development Bank and the Secretary General of the Organisation Internationale de La Francophonie. The Prime Minister also met the Mauritian community working at the African Union and in other African Organisations. *** Page 2 of 3 3. Cabinet has taken note of the status of implementation of the small development projects financed under the Indian Grant Assistance to the tune of Rs400 million for the implementation of small development projects across Mauritius, including Rodrigues and Agaléga. Out of 96 projects, 51 projects had been inaugurated, 21 projects were completed and 24 projects were ongoing. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Energy Efficiency (Minimum Energy Performance Standards for Regulated Machinery) Regulations 2025 to provide for the introduction of mandatory Minimum Energy Performance Standards for air conditioners with a view to enhancing effectiveness of control on the energy performance of imported air conditioners. In the first instance, the “Regulated Machinery” would be “Air Conditioner” and would apply to split, double duct and single duct portable air conditioners having a cooling capacity of 12Kw or less. The Regulations would come into operation on 01 March 2025 and a moratorium of six months would be provided to dealers. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note that the Sugar Insurance Fund (Reduced General and Fire Insurance Premiums) Regulations 2025 would be promulgated with a view to exempting sugar cane planters and métayers producing up to 60 tonnes of sugar from the general and fire insurance premiums payable to the Sugar Insurance Fund Board for crop 2024. *** 6. Cabinet has agreed to amendments being brought to the Consumer Protection (Consumer Goods) (Maximum Mark-Up) Regulations 1998 to include frozen packed vegetables and canned vegetables under a Maximum Mark-Up Mechanism. This mechanism was expected to stabilise the market, bring immediate relief to households and reinforce Government’s commitment to curbing the rising cost of living. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note that the 17th edition of the Public Service Excellence Award would be launched by the Ministry of Public Service and Administrative Reforms on the theme “Delivering Results and Building Trust through an Innovative, Sustainable and People-Centric Public Service”. The competition would be open to four categories of institutions, that is, Ministries/Departments, Disciplined Forces, Local Authorities and Parastatal Bodies, and winners under each of these categories would be awarded cash prizes. Page 3 of 3 The participating public organisations would be assessed on the basis of the following criteria - (a) Transformational Leadership; (b) Operational Efficiency to meet Customers’ Needs and Aspirations; (c) Adoption of Innovative and sustainable initiatives; (d) Optimal use of Resources; (e) Fostering Good Governance, Accountability and Transparency; and (f) Promoting a culture of Safety and Health at Work. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that the 29th Volleyball Championship for the Zone VII region would be held from 01 to 08 March 2025 in Mauritius. The competition would be organised by the Mauritius Volleyball Federation and the Confédération Africaine de Volley Ball. Clubs from Mauritius, Reunion Island, Madagascar, Comoros, Seychelles and Mayotte would participate in the competition. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Public Service and Administrative Reforms in the World Governments Summit meeting held in Dubai. The programme focused on shaping a better future for humanity and accordingly, plenary sessions of the Summit dealt with varied themes ranging from Governments in the Intelligent Age, Re-imagining Technology in Government, Global Political influence, Investments in Emerging markets to Financing the future and Effective Governance. The Minister participated in discussions on “Effective Governance for Crisis Resilience”. After the meeting, the Minister had the opportunity to network with the Minister of Public Service of Uganda, the Director General of the African Training and Research Centre in Administration and Development, as well as the Malagasy delegation and the representatives of the African Association of Public Administration and Management. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the - (a) Medical Council of Mauritius; (b) Dental Council of Mauritius; (c) Allied Health Professionals Council; and (d) National Heritage Fund Board, with Mr Ricardo Lalande as part-time Chairperson. ******