Page 1 of 4 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 07 July 2023 1. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2023 into the National Assembly. The object of the Bill is to provide for the implementation of measures announced in Budget Speech 2023-2024 and for matters connected, consequential and incidental thereto. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre Trust Fund and the Embassy of the United States of America in Mauritius, for the operation and maintenance of the American Makerspace set up at the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre. The Memorandum of Understanding would formalise the joint collaboration and enable the Centre to - (a) strengthen international collaboration in the fields of Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics; (b) introduce innovative and internationally benchmarked extra-curricular activities to Mauritian youngsters; and (c) increase the visibility of the Centre at the international level, especially in the United States of America, given that it was already affiliated to the Association of Science and Technology Centers. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Mauritius Post Ltd and the Emirates Post Group Company in the field of Information and Communication Technologies, Postal Services and E-Commerce. The Memorandum of Understanding aims at fostering cooperation in, inter alia, the following areas – (a) formulation of policies, legal and regulatory frameworks of common interest; (b) cooperation for capacity building and transfer of knowledge and expertise in fields of common areas; (c) collaboration with regard to philatelic partners; (d) development of a platform to encourage e-commerce and online purchase; and (e) joint organisation of workshops, seminars, conferences, study tours and training sessions, joint working groups in the fields of postal services and ICT. *** Page 2 of 4 4. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding in the field of Information, Communication Technologies between the Ministry of Information Technology, Communication and Innovation of Mauritius and the Ministry of Communications and Digital Economy of the Republic of The Gambia. The Memorandum of Understanding aims at fostering cooperation, inter alia, in the following areas – (a) digital Government development and the upgrading of data centre; (b) sharing of expertise and know-how in the field of e-Governance; (c) cooperation for capacity building and transfer of knowledge and expertise in fields of common areas; (d) cooperation in emerging technologies, research and development; and (e) joint organisation of workshops, seminars, conferences, study tours and training sessions, joint working groups in the field of ICT. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Arts and Cultural Heritage and the Rodrigues Regional Assembly on matters related to arts and cultural heritage for the period 2023 to 2026. The objectives of the Memorandum of Understanding are to – (a) enhance artistic and cultural cooperation between the contracting parties on the basis of equality and mutual benefits; (b) encourage local, regional and international exchanges of artists, creators, performers and other players in the fields of arts and cultural heritage to and from Rodrigues; (c) enable eligible staff, artists, creators, performers and other players to participate in workshops, seminars and training courses with a view to enhancing cultural development between the contracting parties; (d) encourage the use of existing facilities, contacts and expertise to foster artistic and cultural development; (e) promote the creative industries; and (f) preserve and promote tangible and intangible cultural heritage between Mauritius and Rodrigues. *** Page 3 of 4 6. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius joining the Global Biofuels Alliance, an India-led initiative, that would be launched in the sidelines of the forthcoming G20 Energy Ministerial Meeting in Goa, India. The Alliance would aim at facilitating cooperation and intensifying the use of sustainable biofuels in relevant sectors, including the transportation sector. It would place emphasis on strengthening markets, facilitating global biofuels trade, developing a concrete policy and providing technical support for national biofuels programmes worldwide. It would also showcase current best practices and success cases. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the status regarding the construction of the National Archives and National Library Building at Réduit Triangle, Moka. The building would be a state of the art building of international standard in accordance with international archival and library standards. The building would comprise ground plus three floors, with associated infrastructure works. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note of the opening of an alternative trail at Le Morne Brabant Mountain on Saturday 08 July 2023. To commemorate the 15th Anniversary of the Inscription of Le Morne Cultural Landscape on the World Heritage List, the Ministry of Arts and Cultural Heritage in collaboration with Le Morne Heritage Trust Fund, would also be organising a series of activities during the months of July and August 2023. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note that as at 05 July 2023, there were 29 active cases of COVID-19, out of which one was admitted at the New ENT Hospital. Over the period 29 June to 05 July 2023, no death was attributed to COVID-19. Cabinet has also taken note that a Multi-Sectoral Committee on Dengue has been set up under the chair of the Minister of Health and Wellness to monitor the situation in both Mauritius and Rodrigues. Sensitisation campaigns were being carried out on cleaning and precautionary measures to be taken in order to prevent cases of Dengue. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by the Ministry of Youth Empowerment, Sports and Recreation in collaboration with the Mauritius Recreation Council, the National Youth Council and the Mauritius Sports Council, from 17 to 29 July 2023, in the context of the forthcoming winter school holidays. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Youth Empowerment, Sports and Recreation in collaboration with the National Youth Council and the Mauritius Recreation Council, would organise a National Youth Summit and a Youth Concert on 05 and 12 August 2023, respectively to celebrate the International Youth Day 2023. The International Youth Day is celebrated each year on the 12th of August. The theme chosen by the National Youth Council for this year’s celebration is - “Nou Zenes Nou Rises”. Page 4 of 4 The Summit would provide a national platform for the youngsters to network, discuss, and brainstorm on themes that were of concern to them. The Summit would also feature three concurrent workshops on health and wellness, economic empowerment and community engagement. The Youth Concert would provide a platform for young budding artists to showcase their talents. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Education, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology in the G20 Education Ministers’ meeting held in Pune, India. The G20 Educational Ministerial Outcome Document was endorsed and the Chair’s Summary included – (a) the critical role that education plays as an enabler of human dignity and empowerment, equity and inclusiveness, sustainable economic growth, active citizenship, prosperity, peace and well-being; (b) a commitment to work together for a resilient, equitable, inclusive and sustainable future through accessible quality education and training; (c) all learners, irrespective of their circumstances, should have access to quality, inclusive and equitable education and training as well as support for their well- being; and (d) the important role of digital transformations, women-led development, green transition and education for sustainable development and lifestyles as accelerators that can advance the progress towards the achievement of the SDGs. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development in the Sommet pour un Nouveau Pacte Financier Mondial held in Paris, France. The objective of the Summit was to bring all countries and stakeholders together and discuss the scale and magnitude of the financing required to enable a green transition that is fair and inclusive. The Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development also had a meeting with a delegation of Mouvement des Enterprises de France International. In addition, a roundtable discussion was held with Paris Europlace and some of its Members on opportunities available in the financial services sector. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Jewellery Advisory Council, with Mr Atmaram Sonoo as part-time Chairperson. *******