Page 1 of 6 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 31 OCTOBER 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent visit of the Prime Minister to Seychelles to attend the Swearing-In Ceremony of the President of the Republic of Seychelles, Dr Patrick Herminie. The ceremony was held on Sunday 26 October 2025 in the presence of several foreign dignitaries. Dr Patrick Herminie took an Oath of Allegiance before the Chief Justice of Seychelles in the presence of thousands of supporters. The ceremony was marked by both solemn and popular performances showcasing a peaceful transition in the presence of the outgoing President and former Cabinet Ministers. The Prime Minister was the first Head of Government to call on President Herminie on his first day of Office. They had a warm and meaningful exchange on bilateral relations and discussions on, inter alia, the following issues – (a) Small Island Developing States; (b) Joint Commission between Mauritius and Seychelles; (c) Bilateral Agreement on Cooperation in the Fisheries Sector; and (d) Joint Management Area of the Extended Continental Shelf. The Prime Minister extended an invitation to President Herminie to visit Mauritius. During his visit, the Prime Minister also had a meeting with HE Mr Chandrapuram Ponnusami Radhakrishnan, Vice-President of the Republic of India and engaged on the outcomes of his recent official visit to India. The Indian side mentioned the donation of USD25 million budget support which will be made on 02 November 2025, during the commemoration of the 191st Arrival of Indentured Labourers in Mauritius. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Financial Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering (Administrative Penalties) Regulations 2025, which will provide an exhaustive list of breaches of legal obligations, categorised by gravity which are either low, moderate or high. The Regulations prescribe penalties ranging from Rs5,000 to Rs250,000. The Regulations further require regulatory bodies to consider key factors such as the gravity and duration of the breach, the recurrence of non-compliance, the compliance history and general conduct of the member concerned, any remedial actions already taken, and the economic impact of the penalty before determining the quantum to be imposed. The promulgation of the Regulations will also serve as a call to action for all regulatory authorities to ensure that breaches are detected, investigated, and sanctioned in a timely and consistent manner. The regulatory bodies concerned are the Financial Intelligence Unit, the Gambling Regulatory Authority, the Mauritius Institute of Professional Accounts and the Registrar of Companies. *** Page 2 of 6 3. Cabinet has taken note of the formulation of a comprehensive Plan by the Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities aimed at advancing the national objectives of energy security, energy transition and energy efficiency with a view to ensuring a reliable, sustainable and cost-effective supply of energy in the short and medium term. The new energy transition strategy has been developed to give a major fillip to the development of a green energy industry, based on the following six major pillars - (a) intensifying solar energy development; (b) expanding wind energy development; (c) phasing out the use of coal through the National Biomass Initiative; (d) giving a new impetus to roof-top decentralised Photovoltaic production; (e) enhancing the integration of variable Renewable Energy (RE) on the grid; and (f) policy, regulatory and institutional strengthening to accelerate RE development. To maintain the trajectory towards the 2035 RE target and mitigate the escalating peak demand, the Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities is implementing a national Demand Side Management and Energy Efficiency Strategy to manage rising peak demand comprising - (a) introduction and enforcement of minimum energy performance standards on specific appliances; (b) implementation of mandatory energy audits by large energy consumers; and (c) energy performance contracting to facilitate access to financing for efficiency upgrades. In order to allow the integration of more renewables, ensure grid stability and cater for energy security in the coming years, the Central Electricity Board is working towards the implementation of a 450-500 MW Liquified Natural Gas-based combined cycle gas turbines at Fort William. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to a new National Development Strategy (NDS), a national land use framework, comprising policies of national significance. It will provide guidance for residential, tourism, transport, and utility developments, while also identifying areas to be protected or where caution should be exercised in considering strategic land use proposals. The spatial strategy of the NDS is built around six themes, namely – (a) strengthening metropolitan, urban, and rural centres; (b) guiding balanced and inclusive growth; (c) revitalising rural communities through services, agriculture, and innovation; (d) protecting rural and coastal landscapes while enhancing cultural heritage; (e) creating a connected island through sustainable transport; and (f) ensuring climate-responsive resilient planning. Page 3 of 6 The NDS outlines 22 strategic planning policies and 83 supporting policies across key sectors such as agriculture, tourism, transport, environment, and urban development. The NDS will provide for a blueprint up to the year 2040, guiding the development of liveable communities with affordable housing and accessible facilities, promoting economic prosperity through diversified tourism, modernised industry, and agricultural innovation, and expanding infrastructure such as light rail, cycling networks, and strategic road links. It also prioritises environmental protection through afforestation, preservation of natural reserves and wetlands, and careful management of landfill sites and water resources. Urban planning policies further promote inclusive neighbourhoods, accessible green spaces, and higher-density developments near transport hubs to support sustainable and efficient land use. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the implementation of an Action Plan further to the recommendations of the “Review of the Siting Criteria for Stone Crushing Plants and Crematoria/Cremation Grounds” project. The said actions have been categorised into short- term, medium-term and long-term measures. The main recommendation for Stone Crushing Plants pertains to the reduction in buffer distance from 1km to 500m (from site boundary) for existing and new stand-alone stone crushing plants, except for clustered sites and high pollution areas, whereby it is advised to maintain the 1km buffer from the site boundary in the short and medium terms, pending additional site-specific studies to consider a reduced buffer. With regard to Crematoria and Cremation Grounds, it has been recommended to have a prescriptive setback of 50m for both existing and new cremation grounds and crematoria from the site boundaries. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the remedial actions being taken by the Road Development Authority (RDA) following the observation of new cracks alone Phase I stretch of the Ring Road at Pailles. The RDA has engaged a consultant to, inter alia, conduct a detailed survey into the newly observed cracks and propose repair measures for the cracks. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to the implementation of a maximum mark-up price control mechanism for six commodities in Rodrigues under the Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-Taxable goods) Regulations 1998. At present, there are 36 commodities which are controlled with a maximum price mechanism in Rodrigues including pharmaceutical products which are controlled under regressive maximum mark-up. With a view to ensuring that the products are accessible to consumers in Rodrigues while aligning the profit margins with those in Mauritius, a maximum price for each consignment of the following products will be established based on the margins for wholesalers and retailers – (a) pharmaceutical products; (b) basmati rice; (c) pasta; Page 4 of 6 (d) sanitary pads, tampons and towels; (e) soaps and detergents; and (f) toilet paper. *** 8. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius endorsing the following initiatives - (a) the COP29 Global Energy Storage and Grids Pledge which is a commitment by Governments and non-state actors to accelerate the energy transition by deploying 1,500 GW of energy storage and adding or refurbishing 25 million kilometers of grids by 2030. It aims to support the tripling of global renewable energy capacity and doubling energy efficiency improvements by the end of the decade by making energy storage and grids a cornerstone of the global energy system; (b) the COP29 Green Energy Pledge: Green Energy Zones and Corridors which is a commitment aiming at fostering regional and international cooperation for renewable energy deployment and infrastructure. It aims to create interconnected grids that link abundant green energy sources such as solar energy or wind energy with communities which need them, while simultaneously promoting investment, economic growth and grid modernisation. Currently, 57 Member States and eight non-state actors have endorsed that initiative; and (c) the COP29 Hydrogen Declaration which is a pledge to accelerate the global use of renewable, low-carbon, and clean hydrogen as a tool for decarbonisation. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the activities organised by the Local Authorities across Mauritius in the context of Divali Celebrations 2025, with the support of the Ministry of Arts and Culture. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of Les Assises du Travail et de l’Emploi organised by the Ministry of Labour and Industrial Relations from 23 to 25 September 2025. Around 150 representatives of workers’ organisations, employers’ organisations and Governmental bodies, including the Rodrigues Regional Assembly, participated in the Assises. The Director of the Country Office of the International Labour Organization for Madagascar, Comoros, Mauritius and Seychelles, was also present during the Assises. The Assises were structured into panel presentations followed by breakout sessions and plenary reporting. During the breakout sessions, a large number of issues were discussed and proposals were made for improvements in the world of work. Participants reached general consensus in respect of the following issues, grouped under the five themes discussed, namely – Page 5 of 6 (a) Theme 1 : Worker’s Rights and Conditions of Employment; (b) Theme 2 : Current Occupational Safety and Health Challenges; (c) Theme 3 : Employment Facilitation, Migration and Labour and Skills Shortage; (d) Theme 4 : Industrial Relations; and (e) Theme 5 : Dispute Resolution Mechanisms. The reports of the different breakout sessions and the written submissions from stakeholders are being compiled and will be analysed by three different technical committees. Thereafter, a consolidated Action and Implementation Plan will be prepared to give effect to the recommendations. Further consultation will be held with relevant stakeholders before validation of the Action and Implementation Plan. The Minister of Labour and Industrial Relations will chair a Tripartite Monitoring Committee for the monitoring of the Action and Implementation Plan. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of the Joint External Evaluation of the International Health Regulations (IHR), organised by the World Health Organization (WHO) from 10 to 14 November 2025. The Joint External Evaluation is one of the key monitoring and evaluation tools under the International Health Regulations Monitoring and Evaluation Framework, which is a voluntary, collaborative, and multi-sectoral assessment, conducted by international and national experts, to objectively measure a country’s level of preparedness and response across 19 technical areas and 56 indicators, organised under four core domains - Prevent, Detect, Respond, and IHR-related hazards and Points of Entry. It provides an independent verification of the country’s readiness and ability to prevent and control emerging and re- emerging health threats, such as dengue, chikungunya, Mpox, and other zoonotic disease. The objectives of the 2025 Joint External Evaluation are, inter alia, to – (a) assess the current status of IHR (2005) implementation in Mauritius; (b) identify priority actions and capacity gaps; (c) foster transparency and international accountability; (d) strengthen national and multi-sectoral collaboration; and (e) enhance national visibility and credibility. On the basis of the final Joint External Evaluation report, the Ministry of Health and Wellness, with technical support from WHO, will elaborate a new five-year National Action Plan for Health Security to operationalise the recommendations of the Joint External Evaluation. *** Page 6 of 6 12. Cabinet has taken note that the Association Francophone des Autorités de Protection des Données Personnelles (AFAPDP) will hold its Annual Conference and General Assembly on 24 and 25 November 2025 in Mauritius. The Conference programme will feature three high-level thematic panels with the participation of international experts on the following themes – (a) Artificial Intelligence and International Data Protection Standards - examining how global frameworks can guide the ethical and lawful development of AI technologies; (b) Strategic Role of Data Protection Officers (DPOs) - discussing the DPO’s contribution to effective data governance and organisational accountability; and (c) Innovation in Regulation - exploring the use of regulatory sandboxes and agile governance tools to address challenges associated with emerging technologies. The Conference is expected to bring together around 65 participants, including representatives from member states, public institutions and private sector organisations, who will deliberate and adopt key strategic decisions, including a Resolution, that will define the policy direction and outcomes of the AFAPDP for the coming years. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of the 2025 FIRST & AfricaCERT Symposium: Africa and Arab Regions from 02 to 05 December 2025 in Mauritius. The symposium will regroup participants from Africa, Europe, Asia, and North America, including experts from leading incident response teams, academia, Government, and the private sector; international speakers and trainers from the FIRST community; as well as local stakeholders comprising Government agencies, critical information infrastructure operators, academia and private sector enterprises. The symposium will strengthen regional and international partnerships, enhance operational capabilities and contribute to the development of a more secure and resilient cyberspace across Africa and the Arab regions. The symposium will provide – (a) exposure to advanced technical training and international best practices for Mauritian professionals; (b) reinforcement of Mauritius’ standing as a trusted, secure digital economy in Africa and Mauritius’ commitment to international best practices in cybersecurity; (c) enhanced collaboration with global experts, leading to potential partnerships in cybersecurity, research and development, and training; and (d) insights gained to be used to strengthen national cybersecurity strategies, policies, and frameworks. *****