Page 1 of 4 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 20 October 2023 1. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction into the National Assembly of the Mauritius Commercial Bank Foundation (Amendment) Bill. The object of the Bill is to amend the Mauritius Commercial Bank Foundation Act to enlarge the scope of choice of subjects for the award of the Mauritius Commercial Bank Foundation Scholarship. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent official visit of the Prime Minister to Rodrigues. The Prime Minister attended the official ceremony of the Rodrigues Day held at Jean Paul II Stadium, La Ferme where he highlighted that the development of Rodrigues remains one of the priorities of Government and stressed on the plethora of measures taken by Government to promote the socio-economic and inclusive development of Rodrigues. The Prime Minister also attended the celebration marking the 20 years of the Airport of Rodrigues Ltd and the Rodrigues Duty Free Paradise Company Ltd. He underlined the excellent performance of the Rodrigues Duty Free Paradise Company Ltd and highlighted that a new aircraft ATR 72-600 by Air Mauritius would be flying to Rodrigues shortly. The Prime Minister inaugurated the Mauritius Police Force Shooting Range which is a state-of-the-art facility and the first of its kind in the region. He also had a working session with the Executive Council where discussions centered on the sustainable integrated development of Rodrigues, and also airport development and the water sector development. The Prime Minister effected a site visit at the Cotton Bay and Resort Spa at Pte Cotton to take stock of progress made with regard to the refurbishment and extension works being undertaken thereat. The hotel was expected to be fully operational around March 2024. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note that the International Organization for Migration in collaboration with the Indian Ocean Commission would organise a “Sub-Regional Capacity Building Workshop on Migration Policy Development, Implementation and Monitoring in the IOC Region” from 08 to 10 November 2023, in Mauritius. The Workshop would be conducted within the framework of the European Union funded Southern Africa Migration Management Project which intends to improve migration management in Southern Africa. It aims at facilitating dialogue and knowledge sharing on best practices among stakeholders on migration policy and for migration management within the region. *** Page 2 of 4 4. Cabinet has taken note of the technical assistance being provided by the International Organization for Migration for the programme entitled “International Migration Law Capacity Development Programme for Africa” specifically tailored for Government officials of African Member States to provide comprehensive training on international migration law at the African Capacity Building Centre. The implementation of the two-year programme would contribute to capacity building and development of Government officials on legal frameworks governing migration and migration policies. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of the 3rd International Conference on Global Trends in Management, Information Technology and Governance in an e-World (e-MIG – 2023), jointly organised by the Open University of Mauritius and the University of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, on 26 and 27 October 2023, in Mauritius. The e-MIG – 2023, which would be on the theme “Resilience, Innovation and Management in a Turbulent Environment”, would bring together academics, researchers, doctoral students and representatives of IT companies from a wide range of disciplines to showcase global trends in an e-World, as well as the impact of COVID-19 on the academic space. In addition, the Conference would provide an opportunity for researchers of the Open University of Mauritius to develop collaboration with doctoral students from other countries. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note that the University of Mauritius would host the 10th International Annual Conference of the Southern African Social Protection Experts Network (SASPEN) on the theme “A decade of social protection with SASPEN - Taking Stock to inform Social Protection Systems’ Strengthening in the SADC” from 24 to 26 October 2023, in Mauritius. The Conference would bring together stakeholders from various sectors including academia, civil society organisations, government agencies and international organisations to make a valuable contribution to the promotion of social protection and social integration. The Conference would, inter alia, – (a) provide an opportunity for Mauritius to showcase its achievements and best practices in implementing social protection schemes, as well as to learn from the experiences of other countries; (b) promote stronger cross-border collaboration among social protection researchers, policy makers and practitioners in the SADC region and beyond, on social protection issues; and (c) contribute to the international visibility of the University of Mauritius and the country. *** Page 3 of 4 7. Cabinet has taken note that the Modern Sugar Storage Facility Project at Riche Terre would be implemented in a phased manner by the Mauritius Cane Industry Authority. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that former Puisne Judge Joseph Gérard Angoh, GOSK, has been elected to the Human Rights Council Advisory Committee for a three year period. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Financial Services and Good Governance in the Africa Financial Services Investment Conference and the Africa Venture Capitalist Association Sustainable Investing in Africa Summit, in London. During the Summit, the Minister participated in a Fireside Chat on Sustainable Finance and elaborated on the endeavour to launch an African Environment Social Governance Framework to better promote sustainable/impact investment to Africa. During his mission, the Minister had meetings with the Trade Envoy of the UK Prime Minister to Mauritius and South Africa and the Chairman, Euro Exim Bank. He also participated in a Business Meet with the Standard Chartered Bank, a Business Forum organised by Sovereign Group, an Investor Meeting organised by AXYS, the East African Association Investor Meeting and a meeting with Global Finance and Capital Markets. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Attorney General, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) Council of Ministers in Colombo, Sri Lanka. The projects and programmes in the priority areas of cooperation of the Association were reviewed and discussed. The Republic of Bangladesh handed over the chairmanship of the IORA to Sri Lanka for the period 2023-2025. The IORA Vision 2030 and Beyond document which was adopted enunciates actions which IORA Member States aspire to pursue with a view to advancing the Association’s cooperation agenda. He also held bilateral meetings with the Deputy Foreign Minister for Political Affairs of the Republic of Korea, the representative of the Chinese Government on African Affairs, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Malaysia and the Second Minister for Education and Foreign Affairs of Singapore. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note of the activities which would be organised in the context of World Fisheries Day 2023, celebrated annually on 21 November, with the aim of highlighting the critical importance of healthy ocean ecosystems and ensuring sustainable stocks of fisheries in the world. The Ministry of Blue Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries and Shipping would organise, inter alia, the following activities – Page 4 of 4 (a) inter-religious prayers, a wreath laying ceremony and parade by the National Coast Guard, followed by the Last Post, in collaboration with the Fishermen Welfare Fund at Le Morne Public Beach on 22 November 2023; (b) an Open Day at the Blue Bay Marine Park for the public on 26 November 2023; and (c) an exhibition in the compound of the Blue Bay Marine Park on 26 November 2023 with the participation of the Fishermen Welfare Fund, the Seafarers’ Welfare Fund, the Fisheries Protection Service, the Albion Fisheries Research Centre, the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Ltd, the Mauritius Oceanography Institute and the National Coast Guard, to showcase all the works being undertaken thereat. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Arts and Cultural Heritage in collaboration with the Mauritius Tourism Promotion Authority would organise National Divali Shows on 03, 04 and 05 November 2023 at Triolet, Flacq and Souillac, respectively with the participation of local artists and artists from India. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note that on 17 October 2023, the Ministry of Tourism of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia officially announced that Mauritius had been added to the list of countries whose citizens could apply for an E-Visa online through an E-Visa Platform before travelling, or upon arrival in Saudi Arabia, through the visa offices of the Immigration Department. Cabinet has also taken note that on 29 September 2023, a Presidential Decree announced that Angola would exempt citizens of Mauritius from Tourist Visa to enter Angola. The 90-day visa-free annual stay in Angola would be granted to travellers arriving in the country exclusively for tourism purposes. However, the duration of each stay should not exceed 30 days upon each entry into the country. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade has provided assistance in the repatriation of 36 Mauritian nationals who were in Israel on pilgrimage. The pilgrims reached Mauritius on 14 and 16 October 2023, respectively. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Clinical Research Regulatory Council with Dr Marie France Lan Man Hiew Chan Sun, as part-time Chairperson. *******