Page 1 of 9 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 07 NOVEMBER 2025 1. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Police (Amendment) Bill into the National Assembly. The object of the Bill is to amend the Police Act so as to empower the Commissioner of Police to retain the services of foreign specialised investigative officers to carry out, under the direction and control of the Commissioner of Police, complex or serious criminal inquiries. The specialised investigative officers will have no powers of arrest. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Courts (Amendment) Bill into the National Assembly. The object of the Bill is to amend the Courts Act with a view to simplifying and streamlining the procedure for an application for judicial review. Accordingly, an application for leave to apply for judicial review shall be made, inter partes, to the Judge in Chambers and the Judge shall determine the application for leave on the papers alone, but the Judge may, where he deems necessary, request for written submissions on any point and, in exceptional circumstances, require an oral hearing in Chambers. A time limit is also being prescribed on the Judge in Chambers to determine the application for leave to apply for judicial review and it is further being provided that where leave is granted, the application for leave shall stand as the application for judicial review. Consequently, several other enactments are being amended so as to align them with the new judicial review provisions of the Courts Act. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note of the zoning framework for the Chagos Archipelago Marine Protected Area (CAMPA) and the roadmap for the stewardship and resettlement framework under CAMPA. CAMPA will cover approximately 645,835 km2 and will be divided into four zones, each aligned with the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) categories to ensure effective conservation and management. The IUCN provides an internationally accepted framework for classifying protected areas according to their management objectives, which is widely adopted under the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) to guide national and regional conservation efforts. A roadmap has been elaborated for the stewardship and resettlement framework under CAMPA. The roadmap outlines a five-year plan with the following objectives – (a) establishing an effective institutional and legal framework for CAMPA as a statutory body under the Prime Minister’s Office, working in close coordination with the Department for Continental Shelf, Maritime Zones Administration and Exploration; Page 2 of 9 (b) implementing a zoning and management framework consistent with the IUCN classification system; (c) facilitating phased resettlement in the designated Traditional Zone for Resettlement on Peros Banhos and Salomon Islands; (d) developing scientific research plans, management plans, operational protocols, and budgetary framework; (e) promoting sustainable infrastructure and livelihoods through renewable energy, circular waste systems, and eco-friendly housing; and (f) strengthening scientific monitoring, conservation enforcement, and community participation to safeguard biodiversity. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the National Housing Development Company Ltd introducing a new scheme, based on a “Rent-to-Own” mechanism, to cater for beneficiaries who are not able to qualify for existing financing schemes. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the setting up of a new body which will be responsible for the management and preservation of islets around the island and to drafting instructions being conveyed to the Attorney-General’s Office for the preparation of the required legislation for the setting up of the proposed new body. The new entity will, inter alia, be responsible for - (a) the development and implementation of Master Plans for the sustainable management of the islets; (b) the day-to-day management of the islets to ensure that they are properly maintained; (c) the provision of the necessary facilities and infrastructure as well as regular maintenance thereof; (d) overseeing the zoning, infrastructural development and restoration/conservation projects within islet boundaries; (e) ensuring the collaboration with relevant stakeholders in the management and regulation of activities on the islets; (f) the formulation of guidelines for access, usage and preservation/ conservation of the islets while ensuring measures to be taken on ecological threats such as invasive species, pollution or climate-related risks and for the preservation of the existing biodiversity of the islets; and (g) facilitating the implementation of ecological studies and collection of data. *** Page 3 of 9 6. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Immigration (Permits) (Prescribed Fees, Guarantees and Application Form) (Amendment) Regulations 2025. The Immigration Act currently provides for the holder of a work and residence permit to make a deposit with, or provide a bank guarantee to the Immigration Officer to indemnify Government for any expense or charge likely to be incurred for his maintenance, support or removal. The Immigration Act has been amended so that, in lieu of a Bank Guarantee, the employer shall pay an annual non-refundable prescribed fee per non-citizen worker. Accordingly, the Immigration (Permits) (Prescribed Fees, Guarantees and Application Form) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 will provide for - (a) the replacement of the existing bank guarantee with a non-refundable annual fee of Rs500 payable by the employer for each non-citizen worker; and (b) applicants of an occupation permit, a residence permit as retired non-citizen or a short-term occupation permit will also have to pay an application fee of USD50. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Consumer Protection (Sale of Essential Goods During Emergency Period) Regulations 2025 and the Consumer Protection (Price Label) Regulations 2025. The Consumer Protection (Sale of Essential Goods During Emergency Period) Regulations 2025 will provide a dedicated legal framework for regulating the sale and pricing of essential goods during officially declared emergencies. During such emergency periods, the regulations will prohibit retailers from hoarding or refusing to sell essential goods, increasing prices without justification, or applying discriminatory pricing. Retailers will also need to refrain from contravening provisions of the Fair Trading Act and Consumer Protection legislation. The Consumer Protection (Price Label) Regulations 2025 aim to modernise price display requirements and strengthen consumers’ ability to make informed comparisons. The regulations will prescribe clear formatting and visibility standards for price boards in retail outlets. *** 8. Cabinet has agreed to the setting up of an Inter-Ministerial Committee on Anti-Money Laundering, Combatting the Financing of Terrorism, and Combatting Proliferation Financing (AML/CFT/CPF) co-chaired by the Attorney-General and the Minister of Financial Services and Economic Planning. The Committee will oversee and coordinate the preparatory work for the forthcoming Mutual Evaluation of Mauritius’ AML/CFT/CPF framework, which will be conducted by the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group (ESAAMLG) in 2027. Page 4 of 9 The Committee will provide the necessary governance mechanism to ensure that all relevant Ministries, regulatory bodies, and law enforcement agencies work in concert towards a unified national strategy and evidence-based results. The Committee will provide high-level guidance on priority reforms, ensure inter-agency coordination with the 16 enforcement agencies and oversee the implementation of the national AML/CFT/CPF Agenda. The Inter-Ministerial Committee will provide strategic direction to the National Committee on AML/CFT/CPF matters to monitor implementation progress on the National AML/CFT/CPF Strategy and for co-ordination among its Immediate Outcome sub-committees and resolve policy or operational bottlenecks. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of progress made regarding the implementation of the integrated e-Social Security (eSS) system to cater for the payment of basic and contributory pensions as well as other benefits. In order to ensure the smooth implementation of the eSS system, some preparatory projects have been executed in parallel to guaranteeing organisational and technical readiness while ensuring a seamless and effective transition to the new system. The Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity has already initiated actions for a comprehensive data quality assessment, bulk scanning of beneficiary files and the alignment of Standard Operating Procedures and Business Rules to the new system in order to promote consistency and transparency. The implementation of the eSS is expected to bring a radical change in the Mauritius Social Security landscape as this will have an impact on processes, people and technology. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the school calendar for Primary and Secondary schools for the academic year 2026 as follows – First Term Second Term Third Term Monday 12 January 2026 to Friday 03 April 2026 Monday 12 January 2026 Admission: Grade 1 in Primary schools, Grade 7 in Regional Schools and Grade 10 in Academies Tuesday 13 January 2026 Resumption of all classes Monday 20 April 2026 to Friday 17 July 2026 Monday 17 August 2026 to Friday 30 October 2026 *** Page 5 of 9 11. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius signing two Agreements developed by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) with a view to aligning with the highest standards regarding transparency and exchange of information, namely – (a) the Multilateral Competent Authority Agreement on Automatic Exchange of Information pursuant to the Crypto-Asset Reporting Framework; and (b) an addendum to the existing Multilateral Competent Authority Agreement on Automatic Exchange of Financial Account Information. The Agreements will provide a mechanism for enhanced exchange of information that will also capture transactions involving crypto-assets. This will enable tax authorities across the world to co-operate in the fight against tax evasion. *** 12. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Mauritius Institute of Professional Accountants (MIPA) and the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI). The collaboration between the two institutions is aimed at fostering mutual cooperation for the benefit of their members while strengthening the global reputation of both institutions. The partnership seeks to advance knowledge and professional growth through joint efforts in taxation, quality support, research, and capacity building for Small and Medium Practitioners, as well as through exchange programmes and Continuous Professional Development (CPD). Both institutions will organise and participate in joint seminars, workshops, and conferences, with CPD recognition governed by their respective rules. They will also facilitate student and member exchanges to enhance global professional exposure. Additionally, ICAI will assist MIPA with updates, IT capacity building, and quality assurance frameworks, while MIPA will support ICAI by providing updates and promoting the profession within Mauritius. Together, both parties will extend mutual support in engaging with regional and international accountancy bodies, thereby strengthening the profession at national, regional, and global levels. *** 13. Cabinet has agreed to the University of Mauritius signing a Memorandum of Understanding with CGC University, Mohali, India, which aims to establish opportunities for collaboration in the following areas – (a) academic staff collaboration in research, teaching and learning in areas of common interest; (b) general academic collaboration including the exchange of educational resource materials and publications that are of mutual interest; (c) assessment of units for credit for prior learning for academic programmes offered at each institution; Page 6 of 9 (d) development and implementation of student mobility programmes; (e) development and implementation of academic staff exchange programmes; (f) identification of special short-term academic programmes and projects of mutual benefit to both institutions; and (g) any other collaborative efforts the parties consider to be appropriate from time to time. *** 14. Cabinet has agreed to the Higher Education Commission signing a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), with Le Haut Conseil de l’Evaluation de la Recherche et de l’Enseignement Supérieur (Hcéres). The purpose of the MoU is to set out the general terms for cooperation in the field of quality assurance in higher education and research, in order to gain a better understanding of the higher education and research systems of both countries, to contribute to their improvement and to promote academic cooperation, particularly with French- speaking higher education institutions. The MoU outlines the following key areas of cooperation – (a) exchange of information and documents pertaining to French institutions evaluated by Hcéres and wishing to establish themselves in Mauritius; (b) exchange best practices on topics related to evaluation and quality of higher education and research, through webinars or joint presentations at international conferences; (c) capacity building of Higher Education Commission staff; (d) exchange programmes between institutions of both countries; and (e) exchange of information related to quality assurance in Mauritius, France and other regions. *** 15. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Tertiary Education, Science and Research signing a Déclaration d’Intentions Communes, with the Government of France, to foster collaboration in higher education and research between the two countries to, inter alia, – (a) promote the mobility of students, teachers and researchers within higher education institutions and scientific research centers in both countries, as well as at seminars and scientific events; (b) promote degree courses in areas of common interest for the social and economic development of both countries; (c) promote capacity building of academic staff and researchers from Mauritian and French higher education institutions and scientific research centers; Page 7 of 9 (d) foster collaboration between French and Mauritian agencies responsible for the evaluation and accreditation of higher education courses and institutions, with a view to guaranteeing the quality of higher education and strengthening mutual collaboration; (e) foster collaboration between the agencies responsible for the recognition of courses and qualifications; (f) promote the establishment of French higher education institutions in Mauritius; (g) promote collaboration for joint research and development projects; and (h) enhance the quality of higher education and research systems, thereby contributing to the strengthening of the academic and scientific potential of both countries. *** 16. Cabinet has agreed to the football ground at Royal Road, Beau Vallon, being named the ‘Jacques Clency Bauluck Football Ground’. *** 17. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Health and Wellness will introduce the Sexually Transmitted Infections Management Guidelines for guidance of healthcare professionals in the management of sexually transmitted infections. The Sexually Transmitted Infections Management Guidelines have been developed by a multidisciplinary team of healthcare professionals in line with the framework and recommendations from the Southern African Development Community, the World Health Organization, and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and customised to the local epidemiological context. The aim of the guidelines is to improve the quality, consistency and effectiveness of care, thereby enhancing healthcare outcomes for patients. The overall objectives are, inter alia, to - (a) provide up-to-date, evidence-informed clinical and practical recommendations for the management of individuals with or without symptoms of sexually transmitted infections; and (b) support clinicians in making timely, evidence-based decisions that optimise patient care and resource utilisation. The Sexually Transmitted Infections Management Guidelines will be disseminated to all healthcare professionals involved in the management of sexually transmitted infections. *** 18. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of the 8th High-Level Meeting of the Djibouti Code of Conduct and its Jeddah Amendment from 12 to 14 November 2025 in Mauritius. Page 8 of 9 The 8th High-Level Meeting aims at enhancing cooperation and coordination in maritime security activities. The meeting will build on the outcomes of the 7th High-Level Meeting held in Tanzania in November 2024 to review progress and chart the next phase of regional cooperation in the maritime domain and in securing the Western Indian Ocean and Gulf of Aden. *** 19. Cabinet has taken note of the activities which will be organised by the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family Welfare in collaboration with the National Children’s Council in the context of the Universal Children’s Day 2025 celebrated on 20 November each year to promote children’s rights, education and well-being. The theme for this year is ‘zanfan viv zot drwa dan lazwa ek linite’. The Ministry of Gender Equality and Family Welfare will organise a recreational Fun Day at the Anse La Raie Outdoor Recreation Centre on 20 November 2025 as well as the following activities – (a) sensitisation on environment by the Mauritius Wildlife Foundation; (b) organisation of nautical and beach fun games; (c) setting of Creative Corners, that is, Art therapy, Bracelet Making, Face painting and Mehendi; and (d) organisation of sports activities and challenges such as Zumba and Tug of war amongst others. *** 20. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by the Ministry of Health and Wellness to mark World Diabetes Day, which is commemorated worldwide on 14 November. The theme for 2025, “Diabetes Across Life Stages”, underscores that diabetes affects individuals throughout their lives and highlights the importance of integrated care, supportive environments, and policies that promote health and dignity at every stage of life. The official launching ceremony of World Diabetes Day 2025 will be held on 14 November 2025 in Ebene. The programme will include the following activities, namely - (a) screening for Non-Communicable Diseases for public officers, including HbA1c testing; and (b) an exhibition on Non-Communicable Diseases and other health-related topics. *** Page 9 of 9 21. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Financial Services and Economic Planning in the promotional mission to London. The Minister delivered a keynote speech during the Africa Investment Summit where she emphasised Mauritius’ role as a credible and forward-looking gateway to Africa. The Minister also delivered an address during the Africa Venture Capital Association Sustainability Summit on three key themes, namely, Africa as a land of opportunity; the importance of bridging the investment gap; and how Mauritius, as an African International Financial Centre, offers a neutral, trusted, and enabling platform to channel sustainable finance into the continent. The Minister also participated in a fireside chat for the Financial Times Africa Summit 2025 where discussions revolved around Mauritius being a model for sustainable growth and innovation in the Continent. In the margin of the Summits, the Minister held a number of bilateral meetings and events with, inter alia, the London Stock Exchange Group; the Vice President and Minister of Finance of Botswana; the UK Deputy Trade Commissioner for Africa; the Secretary General of the Commonwealth; the Financial Conduct Authority; and the Standard Chartered Bank UK. *** 22. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Education and Human Resource in the G20 Education Ministers’ Meeting held in South Africa on the theme of “Solidarity, Equality, Sustainability”. The Ministerial Meeting was preceded by Education Working Group meetings where discussions focused on the following priority areas – (a) Priority 1 - Quality foundational learning: The role of Early Childhood Care and Education to improve the quality of foundational learning; (b) Priority 2 - Mutual Recognition of Qualifications in a Global Context; and (c) Priority 3 - Education Professional Development for a Changing World. During his interventions, the Minister spoke about the endeavours carried out by the Government of Mauritius in each of the three priority areas and stressed on how the meeting was a unique opportunity to reaffirm the collective commitment to strengthening foundational learning and lifelong skills development, early childhood education and high-quality teacher education which are the cornerstones for sustainable economic growth, social cohesion and equitable opportunities. On the sidelines of the G20 Education Ministers’ Meeting, the Minister had the opportunity to network with a number of high dignitaries to explore future opportunities for collaboration. *** 23. Cabinet has taken note that the Board of the Conservatoire National de Musique François Mitterrand Trust Fund has renewed the contract of Mrs Claudie Marie Patricia Ricaud as Director. ******