Page 1 of 9 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 10 OCTOBER 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note that the Prime Minister will effect a private visit to the United Kingdom tomorrow, Saturday 11 October 2025. He will be visiting his doctors for his annual check-up which has been postponed for 10 years. While in London, the Prime Minister will also be holding meetings with the international lawyers who advise the Government on the Chagos Archipelago issue. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Law Practitioners (Disciplinary Proceedings) Bill into the National Assembly. The main object of the Bill is to make provisions for simplified and codified procedures, and provide clarity and transparency, with regard to - (a) the conduct of an independent investigation into an alleged act of professional misconduct by a law practitioner in the exercise of his profession; and (b) the institution and conduct of disciplinary proceedings against a law practitioner before the Supreme Court. The Bill provides for the establishment of the Law Practitioners Complaints Commission which will be the sole body empowered to investigate into an alleged act of professional misconduct by a law practitioner, and decide upon the institution of disciplinary proceedings, if any, against the law practitioner before the Supreme Court. Accordingly, neither the Attorney-General, nor the Bar Council, the Chamber of Notaries and the Mauritius Law Society Council will henceforth investigate into an alleged act of professional misconduct by a law practitioner in the exercise of his profession, and none of these bodies will have the power to inflict any sanction on a law practitioner. As a result of these new provisions, consequential amendments will be brought to the Courts Act, the Law Officers Act, the Law Practitioners Act, the Mauritius Bar Association Act, the Mauritius Law Society Act and the Notaries Act. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to instructions being conveyed to the Attorney-General’s Office for the drafting of a new Consumer Protection Bill. The Consumer Protection Act and the Fair Trading Act will be consolidated into a single, modern, and coherent framework to – Page 2 of 9 (a) streamline enforcement by providing regulators with a clear mandate and a unified set of tools for investigations and sanctions, thereby reducing delays and improving responsiveness; (b) enhance legal clarity and predictability for businesses, encouraging compliance, lowering regulatory burdens, and fostering a fairer and more competitive marketplace; (c) eliminate overlaps and loopholes that currently allow some unfair practices to escape effective sanction; and (d) strengthen consumer confidence by ensuring that citizens can rely on a single, comprehensive law that addresses both traditional and digital marketplace challenges. The Ministry of Commerce and Consumer Protection has engaged in consultations with Ministries, Regulators, private sector stakeholders, and consumer associations on the draft Bill. The new Bill will introduce several new provisions, including – (a) the establishment of a National Consumer Council; (b) strengthened consumer rights; (c) recall procedures for unsafe goods; (d) prohibition of unfair contract terms; (e) enhanced enforcement powers; (f) power to summon traders; (g) regulation of unconscionable conduct; and (h) new regulations for emerging priorities. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the measures being proposed under a Marshall Plan to mobilise additional water resources in a coordinated manner, over the next two to three years, to address the water deficit, particularly during the summer seasons. A multi-stakeholder committee comprising the Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities, the Water Resources Commission, the Central Water Authority, the Wastewater Management Authority, the Central Electricity Board, the Land Drainage Authority and the Irrigation Authority was established to formulate short, medium, and long-term interventions. Six strategic pillars have been developed to underpin the Marshall Plan as follows - (a) Pillar 1 - More active groundwater development; (b) Pillar 2 - Surface water expansion; (c) Pillar 3 - Use of tailrace water; Page 3 of 9 (d) Pillar 4 - Reuse of treated effluent and optimal utilisation of fresh water resources; (e) Pillar 5 - Construction of mini-dam/weirs; and (f) Pillar 6 - Desalination. As a long-term solution, to address chronic water supply constraints in the south and southwest parts of the island, the Rivière des Anguilles Dam project is being expedited. In parallel, following the signing of a Credit Facility Agreement between the Government of Mauritius and the State Bank of India in March 2025, a loan of USD58M had been secured to implement 13 pipeline renewal projects over a length of 114 km. The Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities is also engaging with the Singapore Cooperation Enterprise for technical assistance in strengthening sectoral governance and modernisation of service delivery in the water and wastewater sectors. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the President of the Republic being advised to make the Civil Establishment Order 2025 and the Civil Establishment (Rodrigues Regional Assembly) Order 2025 which is a consolidated Order containing changes in the approved establishments of Ministries/Departments as well as Departments falling under the purview of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly for financial year 2025-2026. *** 6. Cabinet has agreed to the National Position of Mauritius in the context of the forthcoming 30th Session of the Conference of Parties (COP30) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to be held in Brazil in November 2025. The National Position aims to support the preparation of the different statements which the Head of the Delegation will deliver in the plenary sessions and Presidency events, as well as during the technical negotiations. The National Position highlights the unique vulnerabilities of Mauritius as a Small Island Developing State, the devastating climate change impacts faced by the country and the challenges in resilience building and climate mitigation. It also calls upon the international community to uphold the principle of “common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities” and the “polluters pay principle” in collective climate actions at global level. The National Position, moreover, calls for tangible results related to fast tracking actions and addressing critical gaps in adaptation funding and implementation, including the operationalisation of the Global Goal on Adaptation. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note that, following a press article published on 07 October 2025 regarding an alleged fraudulent activity with respect to a car ownership transfer that was purportedly effected through the MauPass Platform, an internal enquiry was promptly initiated by the Ministry of Information Technology, Communication and Innovation to determine the source of the alleged fraud and to identify whether same occurred due to a technical issue with the MauPass platform or via use of forged Page 4 of 9 documents. The Minister of Information Technology, Communication and Innovation chaired a meeting on that issue on 08 October 2025, and the improvement of the Standard Operating Procedures for MauPass is currently under consideration. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that owing to the rapid spread of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) in South Africa since May 2025, a precautionary approach has been adopted by the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries for all consignments of live animals (Cattle, Goat and Sheep) imported from South Africa. In this respect, 100% testing for FMD has been imposed to protect the backyard cattle farming and the deer population in Mauritius, in line with recommendations of the World Organisation for Animal Health. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of the Indian Ocean Wave 2025 (IOWave25) Tsunami Preparedness and Response Simulation Exercise in Mauritius on 15 October 2025, in collaboration with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) – Intergovernmental Oceanic Commission. The UNESCO–Intergovernmental Oceanic Commission, through the Intergovernmental Coordination Group for the Indian Ocean Tsunami Warning & Mitigation System, supports the Indian Ocean Member States in developing the necessary capacity to operate an ‘Effective Tsunami Warning for all’ by providing guidance, training, advice, exchange of experiences and regular exercises. The objectives of the IOWave25 are to - (a) simulate Indian Ocean countries being put in a tsunami threat situation; (b) enable the Mauritius Meteorological Services, as the National Tsunami Warning Centre, and the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre (NDRRMC) to implement their Standard Operating Procedures associated with their national tsunami warning chains; (c) test the preparedness for responding to tsunamis generated by seismic events (undersea earthquakes) and for the second time a non-seismic (volcanic) event; and (d) test Tsunami preparedness and communication systems at the national and community levels while enhancing coordination among stakeholders. The NDRRMC will lead the IOWave25 Tsunami preparedness and Response Exercise and will activate the National Emergency Operations Command. The local authorities will organise a simulation exercise with local stakeholders, tourist operators and coastal communities in their respective areas. *** 10. Cabinet has agreed to the organisation of the following activities by the Ministry of Arts and Culture in collaboration with the Aapravasi Ghat Trust Fund, on 02 Page 5 of 9 November 2025, to commemorate the 191st Anniversary of the Arrival of Indentured Labourers in Mauritius - (a) a ‘yaj’ at the Aapravasi Ghat World Heritage Site organised by the Aapravasi Ghat Indian Indenture (Girmitya) Arrival Celebrations Committee; (b) a wreath laying ceremony at the Aapravasi Ghat World Heritage Site; (c) a cultural programme depicting the cultural heritage of the indentured labourers and their descendants; (d) launching of an exhibition on the theme ‘Threads of Memory, Bonds of Belonging’; and (e) a wreath laying ceremony at the Lotus Monument, Antoinette Phooliyar, Barlow, the camp where the first indentured labourers were brought to work in the sugar plantations of Ex-Antoinette Sugar Estate. *** 11. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Protocole d’Accord between the Food and Agricultural Research and Extension Institute (FAREI) and the Groupe GMD SAS. Following an expression of interest launched by the French Government for the piloting of green and innovative technologies, the “Promoting Automated Farming Systems: Set up a demonstration farm for automated farming systems equipment” project, submitted by FAREI, was retained by the French authorities. The Groupe GMD SAS of Reunion Island, with a strong focus on agriculture, was accordingly selected by the French Treasury as the implementing partner for the project. The project is being implemented with funding from the Fonds d'études et d'aide au secteur privé of the French Treasury, GMD SAS and FAREI. The objectives of the Protocole d’Accord, which are in line with Government’s ongoing efforts to modernise and transform the agricultural sector, are to – (a) establish a demonstration farm at Réduit, showcasing automated farming systems, including automated greenhouses, precision farming tools and Internet of Things-based technologies; (b) build local capacity through training and knowledge transfer for farmers, researchers, and extension officers in the use of automated and sustainable farming practices; and (c) contribute to national goals of improving agricultural productivity, addressing labour shortages, and fostering sustainable and climate- resilient farming practices. *** 12. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Ministry of Health and Wellness and the Venkateshwar Hospital, New Delhi, India. The aim of the MoU will be to strengthen specialised healthcare services Page 6 of 9 through structured collaboration. The MoU will provide for capacity building of Mauritian healthcare professionals, technical assistance for upgrading local facilities and access to advanced treatments not available in Mauritius. Moreover, it will promote cooperation in high-specialty fields such as kidney, liver and bone marrow transplant, while ensuring continuous medical education for healthcare personnel and streamlined referral services for Mauritian patients. *** 13. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Ministry of Health and Wellness and Fortis Healthcare Limited, India. The aim of the MoU will be to provide specialised medical care services in various areas through structured collaboration. The MoU will also provide a framework to establish and maintain a collaborative programme for patient care by providing diagnostics and treatment services. Moreover, the objective of the MoU will be to identify activities such as Consultation Camps and Continuous Medical Education Programmes for healthcare personnel. *** 14. Cabinet has agreed to the University of Technology Mauritius signing a Memorandum of Understanding with the University of Seychelles for collaboration in the following areas – (a) development of curriculum and programme of studies; (b) exchange of academic information, materials and opportunities for academic staff and students exchange programmes; (c) conducting of lectures, symposiums and seminars; (d) joint supervision of student projects/thesis/dissertation and research projects collaboration; (e) provision of opportunities for academic staff and students exchange programmes; (f) provision of opportunities for field or research placement for students; (g) collaborative research projects; (h) participation in possible joint training for academic staff; and (i) promotion of other academic cooperation as mutually agreed. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note that a Joint Public-Private Steering Committee co-chaired by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade and the Minister of Industry, SME and Cooperatives will be set up in the context of the hosting, in August 2026, of the 18th US-Africa Business Summit in Mauritius, with representatives of the – (a) Prime Minister’s Office; Page 7 of 9 (b) Ministry of Financial Services and Economic Planning; (c) Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade; (d) Ministry of Industry, SME and Cooperatives; (e) Economic Development Board; (f) Business Mauritius; (g) Mauritius Chamber of Commerce and Industry; (h) Mauritius Export Association; (i) Mauritius Finance; and (j) Mauritius Bankers Association. *** 16. Cabinet has taken note that the second meeting of the Mauritius-India High Powered Joint Trade Committee, established under the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation and Partnership Agreement, will be held on 13 and 14 November 2025 in Mauritius. The Indian delegation will be led by Mrs Renu Lata, Economic Adviser, Department of Commerce, while the Mauritian side will be led by Ambassador J. Bissoondoyal, Secretary for Foreign Affairs. *** 17. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Public Service and Administrative Reforms has developed an e-movement module as an enhancement to the existing e- HR system, which will be implemented on a pilot basis in five Ministries/Departments, in a first instance, prior to its deployment across the Public Service. The e-movement module on the e-HR system will enable employees to record their official movement online, thus facilitating better employee management. The e-movement module will interface with the Electronic Attendance System, which is already synchronised with the Leave Management System, to enable HR users to easily reconcile the attendance of employees with their official movement. *** 18. Cabinet has taken note that the University of Mauritius will organise an International Conference on Fintech, Law, Artificial Intelligence, Management and Education (FLAME 2025) from 14 to 16 October 2025 in Mauritius. FLAME 2025 aims to create a dynamic platform for researchers, professionals, and educators to discuss and exchange insights on the latest advancements, challenges and opportunities in the fields of finance, law, artificial intelligence (AI), management and education. The conference seeks to encourage interdisciplinary collaboration to address the impact of emerging technologies on society and foster innovative solutions for real world problems. The key objectives of the conference include – Page 8 of 9 (a) the exploration and integration of AI in financial services, such as digital payments, blockchain technologies, cybersecurity, financial inclusion and sustainable finance, alongside discussions on regulatory frameworks; (b) focus on legal tech innovations, AI in legal services, cybercrime regulation, data privacy laws, international arbitration and the future of legal practice; (c) AI applications in healthcare, personalised technologies, climate solutions, and other societal domains, emphasising ethical AI development and its transformative potential; (d) leadership strategies, business planning, customer-centric models, marketing for growth, financial management and ethical business practices; and (e) the role of AI in e-learning platforms, gamification, blockchain-based credentialing, adaptive learning technologies and the future of online education. *** 19. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Tourism in the International French Travel Market Top Resa, held at Paris Expo, Porte de Versailles, France. Mauritius occupied a pavillon at the Paris Expo, accommodating hoteliers, destination management companies, tourism associations, and Rodrigues, showcasing Mauritius’ tourism offerings including its niche markets in terms of adventures, sports, spa and wellness, golf, and cultural tourism. The pavillon aimed at reinforcing Mauritius’ visibility on the French market, strengthen relationships with trade partners, including tour operators, airlines, and hoteliers, industry partners and the media and reassuring French tourists that Mauritius is a safe travel destination. During the event, the Minister held discussions with key tourism representatives and decision-makers from several countries, namely China, Poland, Italy, Saudi Arabia, India, Czech Republic and Reunion Island, among others. The interactions provided an opportunity to exchange insights, discuss partnerships, and strengthen Mauritius’ visibility as well as connectivity on the international stage. *** 20. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Industry, SME and Cooperatives in the NextGen Manufacturing Summit Africa 2025 in the Kingdom of Morocco. The Summit was convened under the umbrella of the Alliance for Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing in Africa (AISMA). NextGen aimed at fostering high-level policy dialogue, bringing together decision- makers and innovators from Government, industry, academia and development partners and showcasing practical use cases that can accelerate inclusive and sustainable industrial development across the continent. Page 9 of 9 The Minister co-chaired the first AISMA Strategic Committee meeting on the theme “Unlocking the Future for Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing in Africa for Inclusive and Sustainable Industrial Development”. The Minister also participated as a panel speaker on the theme “Policy Directions for Accelerating Africa’s Smart Industrialisation Journey’’. In the margins of the Summit, the Minister had a bilateral meeting with the Deputy Director-General of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization. Discussions covered potential collaboration for the Programme for Country Partnership aligned with the forthcoming Industrial Sector Strategic Plan 2026–2030. The Minister also explored cooperation in areas such as industrial policy analytics and sector roadmaps, renewables and cleantech, SME digitalisation and circularity, youth and skills engagement, and enhancing the visibility of Small Island Developing States in global industrial forums. *** 21. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Arts and Culture in the Cultural Investment Conference on 29 and 30 September 2025 in Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The overarching theme of the Conference was “From Policy to Prosperity - Culture as a Strategic Investment”, with discussions focusing on a series of sub- themes such as “Culture as a Bridge of Strength - Connecting Nations, Inspiring Futures”, “Beyond Borders - Shaping the Global Cultural Economy”, the “Public-Private Partnership Approach”, and “Capitalising on Heritage - Turning Cultural Icons into Economic Powerhouses” among others. The Conference provided a valuable platform for Mauritius to engage with other countries that are positioning culture as a key driver of economic diversification, tourism and social cohesion. In the margins of the Conference, the Minister had a meeting with the Minister of Culture of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. *** 22. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the – (a) St Antoine Planters Co-operative Trust Board, with Mr Devesh Chatoo as part-time Chairperson; and (b) Board of the Academy of Design and Innovation, with Ms Parveen Mactoom as part-time Chairperson. ********