Page 1 of 5 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 13 SEPTEMBER 2024 1. Cabinet has taken note that the following regulations would be promulgated under the Fisheries Act 2023 - (a) the Fisheries (Automatic Identification System) Regulations 2024 which would allow the Fisheries Monitoring Centre and the National Coast Guard to monitor the movement of vessels and fishing activities carried out in the maritime zone or under the jurisdiction of the Republic of Mauritius or of another coastal State as well as on the high seas. The Regulations would also address shortcomings in the current Fisheries and Marine Resources (Automatic Identification System) Regulations 2016 so as to be aligned with the Act; (b) the Fisheries (Electronic Reporting System) Regulations 2024 which would provide for the responsibilities and obligations of concerned operators of fishing vessels with regard to, inter alia, - (i) the installation of an Electronic Reporting System Unit on board the vessel; (ii) the requirement to notify the Fisheries Monitoring Centre of the Ministry of Blue Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries and Shipping when departing from the port of Mauritius as well as when entering the maritime zones of Mauritius from the high seas; and (iii) daily reporting of fishing activities during the fishing trip including a nil catch on days when fishing is not carried out among others; and (c) the Fisheries (Vessel Monitoring System) Regulations 2024 which would set out the responsibilities and obligations of operators of fishing vessels concerned with regard to the installation and operation of a mobile transceiver on board their vessels. The mobile transceiver should be switched on at all times during fishing campaigns so as to allow the Fisheries Monitoring Centre to monitor the movement and activities of the vessel through the Vessel Monitoring System. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note that the Consumer Protection (Importation and Sale of Second-hand Motor Vehicles) (Amendment No. 3) Regulations 2024 would be promulgated, so that the authorisation of the Ministry of Commerce and Consumer Protection would have to be sought in case of transfer of shares on the demise of a shareholder in an authorised dealer company. *** Page 2 of 5 3. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Local Government (Exemption of Municipal Tax on Family Home) (Amendment) Regulations 2024, to streamline the procedures to allow Municipal Councils to refund the Municipal Tax already collected. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to 32 Remuneration Regulations being amended, to provide for employers to pay arrears for wage relativity adjustment, for the months of July and August 2024, not later than December 2024. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note of the status of implementation of 96 small development projects being financed under the Indian Grant Assistance across Mauritius, including Rodrigues and Agalega. To-date, 60 projects have already been completed and the remaining 36 projects were presently in progress. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note that the fifth edition of the Global Cybersecurity Index 2024 by the International Telecommunication Union was released on 12 September 2024 and Mauritius had been ranked first in Africa and in Tier 1 countries globally. The International Telecommunication Union’s Global Cybersecurity Index 2024 assesses national efforts across five pillars, representing country-level cybersecurity commitments, namely legal, technical, organisational, capacity development and cooperation. Mauritius had continuously been improving on its score from 88 percent in 2018 to 96.89 percent in 2020 and had now scored 100 percent in 2024. Amongst the 47 countries in Tier 1, 12 countries had scored 100 percent, including Mauritius. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to the University of Mauritius signing a Memorandum of Agreement with ITL Trustees Ltd (as Trustee of the Mitsui O.S.K Lines Ltd Charitable Trust) for the implementation of a project named University of Mauritius & Odysseo Marine Station for Coral Conservation Research & Education. The Marine Station would be used to conduct practical marine experiments and teaching activities for undergraduate and postgraduate students of the University of Mauritius in the field of marine sciences, with a focus on corals and coral reefs. *** 8. Cabinet has agreed to the Mauritius Revenue Authority signing an Agreement with the General Administration of Customs of the People’s Republic of China on mutual administrative assistance in customs matters. The objective of the Agreement would be to provide a framework under which both Customs Administrations would provide administrative assistance to each other with a view to better enforcing Customs laws, combatting customs offences and ensuring the security of the trade supply chain. *** Page 3 of 5 9. Cabinet has agreed to the ratification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) between Mauritius and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). The ratification of the CEPA would be communicated to the UAE through a Diplomatic Note, indicating that Mauritius had completed its internal procedures and was prepared to implement the Agreement in accordance with the stipulations contained therein. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note that the Mauritius Society for Animal Welfare would launch an Expression of Interest to invite Non-Governmental Organisations to set up dog shelters, in four localities, with a view to ensuring that free roaming dogs would be provided with a more humane treatment. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note of the implementation, as from 10 September 2024, of the National Colorectal Cancer Screening Programme by the Ministry of Health and Wellness. The National Colorectal Cancer Screening Programme is designed to target all Mauritians attaining 60 years of age and is in the first phase, being rolled out in the Port Louis region. It would be extended islandwide by early 2025. The National Colorectal Cancer Screening Programme is a landmark programme, making Mauritius the first country in Africa to offer a national-scale colorectal cancer screening initiative, free of charge, to all Mauritians while representing a significant step forward in the commitment of the Ministry of Health and Wellness to public health and cancer prevention. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the signing ceremony between Mauritius and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) held during the official visit of Mr Mathias Cormann, the Secretary General of the OECD, to Mauritius, whereby - (a) a Memorandum of Understanding between Mauritius and the OECD was signed for the development and implementation of a Country Programme; (b) letters were exchanged between the Secretary-General of the OECD and the Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development to formalise Mauritius’ adherence to the OECD Declaration on International Investment and Multinational Enterprises; and (c) a report of the Investment Policy Review for Mauritius, by the OECD was launched by the Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development. The event has been impactful in projecting Mauritius as a leader in Africa in terms of commitment to international best practices and has sent a strong signal to Africa and the rest of the world of Mauritius’ commitment towards investment openness and responsible business conduct. *** Page 4 of 5 13. Cabinet has taken note of the virtual participation of the Minister of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity in the 31st Session of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities held recently in Geneva, whereby the Combined Second and Third Periodic Report of Mauritius submitted to the United Nations, in October 2020, was reviewed by a Committee of Experts in virtual mode. The Minister of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity acknowledged the importance of the review to look both at what has been achieved so far and what remains to be done and reiterated the commitment of Government to promoting a barrier-free and inclusive environment. The Committee of Experts, among others, congratulated Mauritius for its efforts to uphold its obligations under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and to promote the rights of persons with disabilities and an inclusive society. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the main outcomes of the 48th Task Force of Senior Officials Meeting and 24th Council of Ministers Meeting of the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group (ESAAMLG) held recently in Kenya. Key progress noted in respect of Mauritius included the implementation of a case management system for handling requests for Mutual Legal Assistance and facilitation of exchange of information by supervisory authorities with their foreign counterparts through Memoranda of Understanding. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Youth Empowerment, Sports and Recreation would organise walks in 18 regions across Mauritius to mark World Walking Day, which is celebrated every year on the first Sunday in the month of October. On Sunday 06 October 2024, the public in general would be invited to walk along tracks identified in 18 regions as from 0900 hours. *** 16. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the National Pension Fund and National Savings Fund Investment Committee, with Mr Anandsing Acharuz, Acting Financial Secretary, as part-time Chairperson. *** 17. Cabinet has taken note of the constitution of the Climate and Sustainability Management Committee, with Mr Anandsing Acharuz, Acting Financial Secretary as part-time Chairperson. *** 18. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the National Savings Fund Technical Committee for a period of two years, with Mrs Shaheena Abdul Carrim, as part-time Chairperson. *** Page 5 of 5 19. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Board of the Financial Services Commission with Mr Harvesh Kumar Seegoolam, GCSK, as part-time Chairperson. *** 20. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Professional Quantity Surveyors’ Council for the period 2024-2026. ******