Page 1 of 6 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 06 OCTOBER 2023 1. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Toys (Safety) (Amendment) Regulations 2023 to facilitate and streamline the administrative procedures regarding the importation of toys. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Civil Aviation (Amendment No.2) Regulations 2023 which provide for the registration of microlight aircraft by the Department of Civil Aviation. The amendment would allow the Department of Civil Aviation to have a better control on the operations of microlight aircrafts. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a “Convention de Partenariat Fexte Tripartite” between the Agence Française de Développement, L’Agence de L’Environnement et la Maȋtrise de L’Energie and the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change. The “Convention de Partenariat Fexte Tripartite” would, inter alia, – (a) support the Mauritian authorities in the implementation of the Circular Economy Roadmap in relation to waste management; (b) assist in the sensitisation of Mauritian stakeholders, including households and the economic operators; (c) assist in the implementation of the Extended Producer Responsibility scheme on selected waste streams; (d) develop plans with respect to prevention and recovery of construction and demolition waste; (e) support Mauritian authorities in the development of anaerobic digestion projects; and (f) provide capacity building to the officers of the Solid Waste Management Division and relevant stakeholders. *** Page 2 of 6 4. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) for the period 2024 to 2028 which would be a new cooperation framework between the Government of the Republic of Mauritius and the UN System. The UNSDCF consolidates the support of the UN System in addressing the main gaps and challenges that Mauritius faces to accelerate the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. The UNSDCF defines development priority areas around which the UN would support transformation to a more inclusive, sustainable and resilient economy. The identified priority areas are – (a) People - Fostering a Human Development Approach for an Inclusive and Thriving Society; (b) Prosperity - Addressing Structural Vulnerabilities and Boosting Sustainable Economic Transformation; and (c) Planet - Enhancing Resilience to the Triple Planetary Crises. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the adoption of the National Cybersecurity Strategy 2023-2026 which has the following objectives – (a) strengthening the resilience of critical infrastructure; (b) mobilising businesses and the community to make cyber space safer by countering cybercrime and protecting personal data; (c) developing a vibrant cybersecurity ecosystem by fostering enterprise and cybersecurity innovation through a skilled workforce; and (d) fostering strong regional and international cooperation. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note that various events would be organised by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade and the Ministry of Arts and Cultural Heritage in collaboration with the Indian High Commission, the Mauritius Film Development Corporation and the Academy of Design and Innovation in the context of the 75th Anniversary of the establishment of the diplomatic relations between Mauritius and India, including – (a) a Closing Ceremony on Friday 17 November 2023 comprising a Bollywood Song Competition, a Fashion Show and a Cultural Performance; Page 3 of 6 (b) a Food Festival; (c) a Film Festival featuring Indian movies, would be screened in various cinema theatres across Mauritius; (d) a “Mega Trade and Cultural Fair”, from 01 to 05 November 2023 at the Swami Vivekananda International Convention Centre. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note that the National Assembly in collaboration with the Indian Ocean Commission and l’Association des Parlements des Etats Membres de la Commission de l’Océan Indien (AP-COI), would organise a “Séminaire d’échange et de renforcement des capacités sur la diplomatie parlementaire, la prévention, la gestion et la résolution des conflits pour les Parlements, membres de l’AP-COI” on 10 and 11 October 2023 in Mauritius. The Seminar is part of the programme of the Indian Ocean Commission under the Projet Gouvernance, Paix et Stabilité and also forms part of the Plan d’Action of the AP-COI. The objective of the Seminar is to ensure the effective implementation of the recommendations of the regional conference on peace and stability held in 2022, through exchange programme and the enhancement of capacity building on parliamentary diplomacy and on prevention, management and resolution of conflicts for the benefit of the members of the AP-COI. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Health and Wellness in collaboration with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) would hold a Final Coordination Meeting on the “RAF6057 Project - Strengthening the Quality of Nuclear Services” from 13 to 17 November 2023 in Mauritius. The Meeting would be followed by a Scientific Conference on “Future of Nuclear Medicine in Africa”. The main objectives of the event would be, inter alia, to - (a) conduct an interactive review of each country’s workplan as well as regional projects; (b) define new steps and strategies with special emphasis on scarcity of capacity building in Nuclear Medicine field; (c) define future objectives and discuss on latest technology advances in the Clinical Nuclear Medicine field; (d) look into the challenges facing Nuclear Medicine practice in Africa; and (e) make recommendations and submit reports to the IAEA and different International Nuclear Medicine Societies. *** Page 4 of 6 9. Cabinet has taken note of the implementation of the Wheat Flour Fortification Programme in Mauritius. The objectives of the mandatory Wheat Flour Fortification Programme are to – (a) reduce nutritional anaemia in female adolescents and women of reproductive age; (b) achieve the global nutrition target of reducing anaemia by 50 percent by 2025; (c) reduce the annual incidence of low birth weight by 30 percent; and (d) improve the nutritional status and quality of life of the Mauritian population. The State Trading Corporation would start commercialising fortified wheat flour shortly. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note that the Wreath Laying Ceremony of the Remembrance Day would be held on Sunday 19 November 2023 at the War Memorial, Royal College, Curepipe, to pay tribute and honour the combatants of World War I and World War II. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by the Ministry of Local Government and Disaster Risk Management and the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre (NDRRMC) to mark the International Day for Disaster Risk Reduction (IDDRR), and the 10 years existence of the NDRRMC. The IDDRR is observed on 13 October every year to raise awareness on actions being taken to reduce risks to disasters and promote a global culture of risk awareness and disaster reduction. The theme retained by the United Nations for Disaster Risk Reduction for this year is “Fighting Inequality for A Resilient Future.” The Ministry of Local Government and Disaster Risk Management would organise a series of activities comprising, inter alia, – (a) a symbolic ceremony at the Municipal Council of Curepipe, which would comprise, the United Nations (UN) Secretary General’s message, unveiling of commemorative publication and plaque, award of certificates of appreciation to stakeholders and soft launch of the National Multi Hazard Emergency Alert System; Page 5 of 6 (b) training programmes on the UN Early Warnings for All campaign and the role of media and content development for mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction and climate action in all formats; (c) sensitisation campaigns on preparedness measures to ensure safety during cyclones and heavy rainfall events/torrential rain warning; and (d) MBC TV and Radio Programmes in collaboration with the NDRRMC, Mauritius Meteorological Services, Special Mobile Force and Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service on general preparedness measures. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent mission of the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Land Use Planning and Minister of Tourism to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia where he attended the official World Tourism Day celebrations. On the occasion of the World Tourism Day, the United Nations World Tourism Organisation launched the ‘Tourism Opens Minds Initiative’ to favour diversification of tourism flows. The ‘Tourism Opens Minds Initiative’ would showcase the powerful role that tourism plays in bridging cultures and promoting a more interconnected and harmonious world. In the sidelines of the meeting, the Deputy Prime Minister held discussions with a number of Ministers of Tourism, including those of Andorra, Bangladesh, Barbados, Croatia, Cyprus, India, Jamaica, Jordan, Malta, Republic of South Africa, San Marino, Sierra Leone and Türkiye. The Deputy Prime Minister also had meetings with the Minister of Transport and Logistics Services, the Chief Executive Officer of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Tourism Development Fund, the Chief Executive Officer of Saudi Air Connectivity Programme and the Director-General of SAUDIA Group. The Deputy Prime Minister also had a bilateral meeting with the Chief Executive Officer of the Saudi Fund for Development. He also had a round-up meeting with the Minister of Tourism of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. During his mission, the Deputy Prime Minister also signed a Loan Agreement with the Saudi Fund for Development in relation to the construction of the Rivière des Anguilles Dam. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent mission of the Minister of Financial Services and Good Governance to the USA. The Minister had meetings with the US Stock Exchange Commission, the Corporate Council on Africa, the US- Africa Business Centre, the US Treasury, the US Department of State, Transparentem, the New York Stock Exchange and the Chartered Financial Analyst Society. The Minister also participated in the Finovate Fall 2023, wherein he gave a special address to promote Mauritius as an ideal destination to work and live. The value of the Mauritius International Financial Centre in stimulating new innovative products and services across Africa was also showcased. *** Page 6 of 6 14. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of National Infrastructure and Community Development in the Global Infrastructure Cooperation Conference 2023 in Seoul, Republic of South Korea. The Minister participated in a High Level Multilateral Meeting, chaired by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure and Transport of the Republic of South Korea, wherein discussions focused on the theme “Advanced Construction Technology and Eco- Friendly Transportation Sessions” and issues relating to smart construction, Artificial Intelligence for Architecture and Project Management and the development of Green Roads. In the margins of the Conference, the Minister had a bilateral meeting with the Vice-Minister of Land, Infrastructure and Transport of the Republic of South Korea. The Minister had a meeting with the Chief Executive Officer/President of the Korean Expressway Corporation and his Management Team to discuss the support extended to Mauritius, in particular in the construction of the Phoenix/Dowlut/Jumbo flyovers as well as the A1-M1 Link Road, with a state-of-the-art bridge, first of its kind in the region. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the National Youth Environment Council, with Mr Kavish Seedam as part-time Chairperson. ******