Page 1 of 3 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 12 SEPTEMBER 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note of the recent Israeli strike in Doha, Qatar’s capital, condemning without reserve these acts of violence. A message of condolence and solidarity is being sent to the Qatari authorities. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Education and Human Resource engaging in consultations with stakeholders on the proposal for a legislative framework to regulate the private primary education sector. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the meeting held under the chair of the Minister of Youth and Sports with the executive members of the Mauritius Olympic Committee and the presidents/members of National Sports Federations in the presence of the representative of the International Olympic Committee, on 09 September 2025, following the freezing of programmes and funds of the Mauritius Olympic Committee by the International Olympic Committee. The Minister of Youth and Sports highlighted his role as facilitator without interfering with the internal affairs of the Mauritius Olympic Committee and the National Sports Federation with a view to resolving the matter in the interest of the Mauritian athletes. The following two proposals have been retained for further discussions – (a) setting up, by the Mauritius Olympic Committee, of an interim 13-member Managing Committee comprising representatives of both disputants (about 15 National Sports Federations, including the Mauritius Tennis Federation) and members of the current executive committee of the Mauritius Olympic Committee (but excluding the Mauritius Modern Pentathlon Federation and the Mauritius Roller and Skate Federation) to align the statutes of the Mauritius Olympic Committee with local legislation; and (b) holding of the election, without the participation of the Mauritius Modern Pentathlon Federation and the Mauritius Roller and Skate Federation. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised to mark the International Day of Older Persons, which is commemorated on 01 October each year in recognition of the significant contribution of elders to the socio-economic development of the country. This year’s theme is “Older Persons Driving Local and Global Action: Our Aspirations, Our Well-Being, Our Rights”, which will serve as a platform for older persons to share their aspirations and advocate for their well-being. Page 2 of 3 The Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity will celebrate the International Day of Older Persons by gathering members of some 846 Senior Citizens Associations. The Senior Citizens Council will hold a consultative workshop on 24 September 2025 with representatives of Senior Citizens Associations with a view to gathering insights on the proposed reforms and legal framework, in line with this year’s theme. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Health and Wellness and the SRM Institutes for Medical Science Hospitals, Chennai, India. The aim of the Memorandum of Understanding will be to strengthen specialised healthcare services through structured collaboration. The Memorandum of Understanding will provide for capacity building of Mauritian healthcare professionals, technical assistance for upgrading local facilities and access to advanced treatments not available in Mauritius. Moreover, it will promote cooperation in high-specialty fields such as Neuro Interventions, Transplantation, Bone Marrow Transplants, Paediatric Surgeries and Cardiac Electrophysiology. It will ensure continuous medical education and streamline referral services for Mauritian patients. *** 6. Cabinet has agreed to the implementation of the Obesity Action Acceleration Roadmap (2025-2030) which will focus on the following five priority actions with a view to reducing the prevalence of obesity in the Mauritian population - (a) enhance obesity prevention and management across the life course in primary health care settings and community-based programmes; (b) promote and create enabling environments to facilitate physical activity appropriate for all ages in different settings; (c) restrict the marketing of unhealthy, ultra-processed foods and sugar-sweetened beverages; (d) behaviour change communication campaigns related to healthy diets, physical activity, and demand for health services; and (e) increase local agricultural production and accessibility to healthy foods to ensure availability and affordability of safe and quality food products. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the formulation of the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) 3.0 for the Republic of Mauritius; and preparation being made for the participation of Mauritius to the 30th Session of Conference of Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Page 3 of 3 The NDC 3.0 follows a process established by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change which is underpinned by a transparency guidance and which comprises two distinct phases, namely the formulation of a Roadmap that aims to assess current NDC implementation, identifying gaps, challenges and opportunities as well as defining the key recommendations for the NDC 3.0. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note of the organisation of Les Assises du Travail et de l’Emploi by the Ministry of Labour and Industrial Relations from 23 to 25 September 2025 at the Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Public Service and Innovation. The main objectives of the Assises are to review the challenges in the world of work and to identify solutions or measures to address these challenges. The objectives are aligned to the four pillars of the International Labour Organization’s Decent Work Agenda, namely employment creation; social protection; rights at work; and social dialogue. The Ministry of Labour and Industrial Relations had invited members of the public, Ministries, non-governmental organisations, private sector associations, representatives of employees, representatives of employers and interested parties to submit proposals for consideration during the Assises. Some 400 proposals from around 70 stakeholders were received and regrouped into the following themes which will be discussed during the Assises - (a) worker’s rights and conditions of employment; (b) current Occupational Safety and Health challenges; (c) employment facilitation, migration and labour and skills shortage; (d) industrial relations; and (e) dispute resolution mechanisms. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the – (a) appointment of Mr Vinesh Sewraz, as part-time Chairperson of the Agricultural Marketing Board; (b) reconstitution of the Loïs Lagesse Trust Fund Board with Mr Robeensing Baboolall, as part-time Chairperson; (c) reconstitution of the Board of Trustees of the Malcolm de Chazal Trust Fund with Mr Gérard Jean-Max Baya, as part-time Chairperson; and (d) reconstitution of the Committee of the President’s Fund for Creative Writing with Mrs Nandini Bhautoo, as part-time Chairperson. ******