Page 1 of 11 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 25 JULY 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note, with concern, of the case reported to the Ministry of Labour and Industrial Relations, by two former employees of legal firm ENSafrica Mauritius, alleging that they had been laid off for wearing hijab at work. The matter has been referred to the Employment Relations Tribunal for the latter to look into their possible reinstatement. The possibility of action being taken against the law firm is being examined. Proposals for amendments to the relevant legislation to address such cases are also being examined. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Civil Appeal Bill into the National Assembly. The object of the Bill is to clarify, simplify and standardise the procedures for all appeals in civil matters made – (a) to the Court of Civil Appeal from the final decision of the Supreme Court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction in civil matters; and (b) to the Supreme Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction in civil matters from the final decision of the subordinate court, such as the District Court, the Intermediate Court, the Industrial Court, the Master and Registrar, the Judge in Chambers or a Tribunal, and to bring together such appeal procedures into one consolidated legislation. The Bill has been rendered necessary with a view to bringing clarity and certainty in this area of the law, being given that the procedures for making appeals in civil matters are scattered in different pieces of legislation and are not uniform. In addition, the Bill imposes an obligation on any Court, immediately after it gives judgment in a civil matter, to notify any party to the case of his right to appeal. Consequently, the Court of Civil Appeal Act and the Court of Civil Appeal Rules 1965 are being repealed, and the Courts Act, the District and Intermediate Courts (Civil Jurisdiction) Act, the Environment and Land Use Appeal Tribunal Act, the Equal Opportunities Act, the Industrial Court Act and the Sale of Immovable Property Act are being amended. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Optical Council (Amendment) Bill into the National Assembly. The object of the Bill is to amend the Optical Council Act 2021 so as to – Page 2 of 11 (a) empower the Optical Council of Mauritius to regulate, in addition to the profession of opticians, the profession of orthoptists; (b) review the composition of the Optical Council of Mauritius with a view to addressing the anomaly with regard to public sector representation; and (c) abolish the pre-registration examination for opticians and, therefore, no pre- registration examination will be required for orthoptists. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note that in March 2023, the General Assembly of the United Nations had approached the International Court of Justice to give its Advisory Opinion on the questions as follows - (a) What are the obligations of States under international law to ensure the protection of the climate system and other parts of the environment from anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases for States and for present and future generations? (b) What are the legal consequences under these obligations for States where they, by their acts and omissions, have caused significant harm to the climate system and other parts of the environment, with regard to – (i) States, including, in particular, Small Island Developing States (SIDS), which due to their geographical circumstances and level of development, are injured or specially affected by or are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change?; and (ii) peoples and individuals of the present and future generations affected by the adverse effects of climate change? Cabinet has further taken note that in a landmark Advisory Opinion delivered on 23 July 2025 on the obligations of States in respect of climate change, the Court has ruled on the above questions as follows – (i) States have an obligation to protect the environment from Greenhouse Gas emissions and act with due diligence and cooperation to fulfil this obligation; (ii) compliance with climate treaties is not necessarily sufficient to fulfil all relevant obligations. Various other sources of most directly relevant law including the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, human rights and customary international law should be considered; and (iii) if States breach these obligations, they incur legal responsibility and may be required to cease the actions causing this, offer guarantee for non-repetition and make full reparation. Page 3 of 11 Additionally, the Advisory Opinion specifies that, even countries which are not Party to the Paris Agreement or which want to leave the Agreement are still required to protect the climate and the environment. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Land Transport initiating action, in consultation with the Attorney-General’s Office, for the preparation of a Bill for the re-introduction of an improved version of the penalty points system with a view to addressing reckless driving and curbing fatal accidents on the roads. Further to the meeting of three sub-committees which had been set up to formulate proposals that could be considered for the re-introduction of the penalty points system, an improved version of the penalty points system has been recommended. The list of traffic offences and corresponding penalty points will also be included in the Bill. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note that the Income Tax (Amendment) Regulations 2025 will be promulgated, to provide for amendments to the Statement of Emoluments and Tax Deduction to include - (a) the date the employee started employment with the employer; and (b) the amount of Portable Retirement Gratuity Fund (PRGF) contributed by the employer for the year. The proposed declaration by the employer of the date the employee started employment and the amount of PRGF contributed in the Statement of Emoluments and Tax Deduction will - (a) provide greater transparency and visibility to employees regarding PRGF contributions made by the employer to the Mauritius Revenue Authority; (b) strengthen compliance by employers; (c) facilitate the computation of gratuity payable upon retirement, death, cessation, or termination of employment; and (d) avoid the risk of disputes arising from the non-disclosure or under-declaration of PRGF contributions. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of new measures to - (a) restrict the sale of domestic Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) cylinders to ensure consistent availability to households, reduce the risk of hoarding and discourage the redirection of subsidised cylinders to non-household purposes; Page 4 of 11 (b) prevent the storage of domestic LPG cylinders on trade premises not involved in their commercialisation to prevent the improper use of subsidised cylinders by businesses; and (c) amend the relevant regulations to provide for the issuance of a formal warning to first-time offenders prior to establishing a contravention or issuing a Fixed Penalty Notice. Relevant legislative amendments would be brought to give effect to the above measures. *** 8. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Consumer Protection (Price and Supplies Control) (Coupons and Gift Vouchers) Regulations 2025 so as to regulate the fair issuance, use, and redemption of coupons and gift vouchers in Mauritius in line with international best practices. The regulations will – (a) provide precise and legally sound definitions for "coupon" and "gift voucher" in order to eliminate ambiguity and ensure clarity for both traders and consumers; (b) require that all coupons issued by traders clearly indicate their terms and conditions of use, including applicable restrictions, limitations, and expiry dates; (c) stipulate that all gift vouchers for which payment has been made by the consumer shall remain valid for a minimum of six months from the date of issue; (d) impose a proactive obligation on traders to notify the holder of a gift voucher at least one month before the expiry of the gift voucher, using any available and practical means of communication, thus ensuring that consumers are adequately informed and able to exercise their rights; (e) explicitly prohibit unfair trading practices such as the refusal to honour valid and legitimate coupons or gift vouchers, the dissemination of misleading or deceptive promotional claims, and the use of bait advertising tactics where the advertised goods or services are not reasonably available; and (f) establish a clear and proportionate penalty structure to deter non-compliance, including a minimum fine of Rs10,000 and a maximum of Rs100,000 for a first offence, and a fine of not less than Rs25,000 and not more than Rs250,000 along with a possible term of imprisonment not exceeding 12 months for repeat or aggravated breaches. *** Page 5 of 11 9. Cabinet has agreed to amendments being brought to the Electronic Transactions Act 2000 to provide, inter alia, for expanding the scope of electronic signatures, incorporating provisions for smart contracts and recognising foreign Certificate Authorities and electronic signatures which will enhance business facilitation by providing robust legal certainty, international interoperability and operational efficiency. *** 10. Cabinet has agreed to the Information and Communication Technologies Act being amended in order to better address the new realities of the sector. The objectives of the amendments will be to – (a) bring clarity to consumers on the services which fall under the mandate of the Information and Communication Technologies Authority (ICTA); (b) clarify the functions of ICTA as regulator and licence provider of radio communication apparatus that are operated on board ships and aircrafts; (c) clarify the functions of ICTA with respect to the conduct of examinations and issuance of certificates for the operation of radio communication services; (d) lighten the procedure for licensing of engineering licences in favour of business facilitation; and (e) introduce a mechanism for compounding technical ICT offences for efficient resolution of certain violations. *** 11. Cabinet has agreed to the proclamation of the English-Speaking Union Act 2015. The objects of the Union will be to, inter alia – (a) promote the English language both in its written and spoken form; (b) promote understanding and friendship between the English-speaking peoples of the world and to engage in any educational work designated to further that objective; (c) provide facilities for the interchange of views and discussion concerning any question affecting the interests, well-being, development, relationships and common problems of the English-speaking peoples of the world; (d) promote and encourage education in any form amongst English-speaking peoples, for the benefit of both adults and young persons, but with special reference to the historical, cultural, artistic, economic, diplomatic and social development of those peoples; Page 6 of 11 (e) promote and organise the interchange of books, pamphlets, periodicals and other information between colleges, schools and other educational establishments or group of members of the Union or persons situated in another country; and (f) promote and encourage correspondence, debates, visits and other activities between universities, colleges, schools, and other bodies situated in Mauritius and in another country. *** 12. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Financing Agreement, between the European Commission and the Republic of Mauritius for the implementation of the Circular Economy Roadmap. This Financing Agreement to the tune of EUR3.5 million will be implemented over some 48 months with the overall objective of strengthening socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable development in the Republic of Mauritius and the specific objectives are as follows – (a) improving the institutional and regulatory frameworks for the implementation of the national Circular Economy Roadmap and Action Plan; and (b) increasing effectiveness of circular economy initiatives within the built environment value chain, prioritising women entrepreneurs in the circular economy. The Action Plan will contribute principally to the achievement of SDG 12 (Responsible Consumption and Production), and also, indirectly, to SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure), SDG 13 (Climate Action), SDG 15 (Life on Land), SDG 14 (Life below Water), SDG 10 (Reduced Inequalities), SDG 5 (Gender Equality), SDG 8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth), SDG 1 (No Poverty), and SDG 17 (Partnerships for the Goals). *** 13. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Data Protection Office and the Bank of Mauritius. The collaboration will be beneficial to the business environment, inter alia, in the following ways – (a) the Bank of Mauritius can streamline or devise requirements that a local bank will have to abide by for the collection of Know Your Customer (KYC) data to comply with Anti-Money Laundering (AML) legal frameworks while ensuring that the appropriate mechanism is in place mandating strict privacy measures for handling of personal data. Thus, the sharing of information between the Bank of Mauritius and the Data Protection Office will ensure that the bank’s KYC procedures both satisfy AML requirements and comply with data privacy laws; and Page 7 of 11 (b) the Data Protection Office, in collaboration with the Bank of Mauritius, can integrate specialised training on data protection best practices into the broader financial compliance programmes and the Data Protection Office can also offer such training to the employees of financial institutions regulated by the Bank of Mauritius. *** 14. Cabinet has agreed to the Open University of Mauritius signing an Accord Cadre de Coopération with L’Université de Toamasina, Madagascar. The Accord Cadre de Coopération aims to strengthen institutional ties through mutual cooperation in the technical and scientific fields with Mauritius benefitting from the joint publication of scientific results and outcomes. The main areas of cooperation are as follows - (a) joint research activities; (b) academic/staff and student exchanges; (c) exchange of PhD students and joint scientific supervision of thesis work; (d) exchange of scientific and technical publications; (e) joint publication of scientific results and educational documents; and (f) organisation of mutual courses and joint seminars, face-to-face or distance learning. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the “Review of the Oversight Mechanism for the Operation of Child Day Care Centres”, carried out by the Office of Public Sector Governance (OPSG). Based on the recommendations made by the OPSG, the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family Welfare will implement an Action Plan and has worked out tentative timeframes for the implementation thereof. To address ambiguities and challenges being encountered in the application of the existing Child Day Care Centres Regulations 2022, the Ministry will review the Regulations. *** 16. Cabinet has agreed to the setting up of two Committees as follows – (i) an Independent Committee of Enquiry to look into alleged mismanagement and industrial relations issues at the New Educational College; and (ii) an Independent Technical Committee to assess the infrastructural integrity of the building of Alpha College. *** Page 8 of 11 17. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the finals of the Inter-College Sports Competition 2025 held from 14 to 18 July 2025. A total of 2,568 students coming from 116 colleges, including four from Rodrigues, took part in the finals, which comprised five sports disciplines, namely athletics, badminton, football, table tennis and volleyball. The overall champion of this year’s edition is St Mary's College having secured eight gold, one silver, and two bronze medals. This performance placed St Mary's College at the top across all five sports disciplines based on medal count. The exceptional performance of Néhémie Clair, from Marechal College of Rodrigues, in the Under-16 years’ category javelin event, with a throw of 56.92m was noted. *** 18. Cabinet has taken note of arrangements being made by the Ministry of Youth and Sports for the participation of the Mauritian delegation in the Jeux de la Commission de la Jeunesse et des Sports de l’Océan Indien to be held in Seychelles from 01 to 10 August 2025. Mauritius will participate in all the 11 sports disciplines, namely athletics, para- athletics, badminton, basketball, boxing, football, judo, swimming, volleyball, yachting and weightlifting. The games will also feature a youth component consisting of an Assemblée des Jeunes, Danse et Théâtre, Esports and the Salon des Jeunes Entrepreneurs. The Mauritian delegation will comprise 234 members with 192 athletes, including 27 from Rodrigues. In order to ensure optimal preparation of the selected athletes for the Games, the Ministry of Youth and Sports is providing the following facilities and support – (a) access to the High-Performance Centre at the Côte d’Or National Sports Complex for physical preparation; (b) participation in local and regional competitions; (c) meal after training sessions; (d) transport facilities; (e) intensive training camps tailored for each sport; (f) provision of general and specific equipment; and (g) medical and para-medical facilities, such as massage, physiotherapy, vitamins and supplements, blood tests, and dental check-up. *** 19. Cabinet has taken note of the implementation of the Anou Transform Nou Landrwa project by the Ministry of Youth and Sports which seeks to foster the development and promotion of sports and cultural activities in socially vulnerable localities across the island. The project was implemented on a pilot basis at Karo Kalyptis by engaging youth and community members in meaningful, structured and inclusive activities. A series of community- building activities were organised, including street football, boxe éducative, painting and fresques murales, minor games and jeux d’antan and cultural evenings. Page 9 of 11 The project was replicated at Batterie Cassée and Résidence Briquetterie. The next event is scheduled to take place at Roche Bois, with further expansion planned in other localities which are being identified around the island. *** 20. Cabinet has taken note of the Action Plan 2025-2029 of the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family Welfare, developed in alignment with the Government Programme 2025- 2029. It defines the strategic direction of the Ministry over the next five years and provides a coordinated framework in fulfilling the Ministry’s mandate. It includes the promotion of gender equality, protection of children, advancement of family welfare, and strengthening of community well-being. The main areas under the Action Plan 2025-2029 include – (a) Treaty Compliance and Legislative Action The Ministry will pursue necessary legal and procedural steps to ratify key regional and international instruments; (b) Institutional Reform and Strategic Planning The Child Protection Services will be revamped and restructured for better service delivery and improved community outreach; (c) Women’s Empowerment and Leadership Key initiatives will be undertaken to enhance women’s participation in leadership, decision-making, and economic activity; (d) Preventing and Addressing Gender-Based Violence Measures will be taken to reinforce legal frameworks and protection mechanisms for victims of Gender-Based Violence; and (e) Strengthening Family Resilience and Social Welfare Initiatives will be rolled out to promote family cohesion, prevent intergenerational poverty, and foster positive parenting. *** 21. Cabinet has taken note of the organisation of a Workshop on the theme “Adolescence and Cybercrime”, to be held on 28 and 29 July 2025 with a focus on teenagers, cybercrime and family well-being. The Workshop aims to - (a) raise awareness among adolescents, parents, and key institutions about cyber threats; (b) sensitise stakeholders on the psychological and social consequences of cybercrime; Page 10 of 11 (c) share best practices and preventive strategies for online safety; and (d) facilitate dialogue among professionals from multiple sectors and generate recommendations for a national response. *** 22. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the Osaka Expo 2025, where Mauritius has a pavilion for the period from 13 April to 13 October 2025. The theme for the Osaka Expo 2025 is “Designing Future Society for Our Lives” and the sub-theme chosen by Mauritius for its pavilion is “Empowering Lives”. The Minister had a bilateral meeting with the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Japan. The meeting was an opportunity to engage in the enhancement of our bilateral ties, and to discuss areas of cooperation. The Minister conveyed his appreciation for Japan’s continued cooperation across various sectors while highlighting the cordial and longstanding relations between the two countries. The Minister also had a working session with the Japan Association of Corporate Executives, during which various issues pertaining to the economic and trade relations between Mauritius and Japan were discussed. *** 23. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Ministry of Commerce and Consumer Protection in the Ninth United Nations Conference to Review All Aspects of the Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive Business Practices, in Geneva. During the Conference, the Minister emphasised Mauritius’ firm commitment to strengthening consumer protection as a key driver of sustainable development. He highlighted that the existing legal framework forms the backbone of the consumer protection system. He further underlined the increasing relevance of digital markets and artificial intelligence to the national agenda, and informed the Conference of his Ministry’s ongoing work on new legislation to regulate digital commerce. The main outcomes of the Conference include the adoption of a draft Resolution for the first-ever United Nations Principles for Consumer Product Safety and a Declaration on Cross-Border Dispute Resolution and Redress. In the margins of the Conference, the Minister held bilateral meetings with – (a) the Egyptian delegation headed by the Minister of Supply and Internal Trade; (b) the Indian delegation which was headed by Mrs Nidhi Khare, Secretary Department of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution; and Page 11 of 11 (c) the delegation of the COMESA Competition Commission headed by its Director and Chief Executive Officer. *** 24. Cabinet has taken note of the outcomes of the meeting of the Committee of SADC Ministers of Justice/Attorneys-General, that was held virtually and was hosted by Zimbabwe on 11 July 2025. The Committee considered the benchmarking exercise carried out by the SADC Secretariat to - (a) introduce a hierarchy of sanctions to be imposed on defaulting Member States; (b) be specific about the last sanction to be imposed under level four sanctions; and (c) determine whether the provisions of Article 33(4) have to be maintained or be amended to enable Council to approve a decision to impose a sanction against a defaulting Member State prior to the Secretariat issuing a notification to the defaulting Member State. *** 25. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the – (a) Board of Mauri-Facilities Management Co. Ltd with Mr Sadaseeven Sooben as part-time Chairperson; (b) Veterinary Council of Mauritius; and (c) Council of the National Social Inclusion Foundation, with Mrs Mary-Anne Sharon Caroline Fitz-Gibbon as part-time Chairperson. *****