Page 1 of 2 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 20 JUNE 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note that the two Committees set up in the context of the Reform of the Pension System as announced in the Budget Speech 2025-2026 will submit their recommendations the following week. Thereafter, a Special Cabinet Meeting will be held to discuss the matter. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Gambling Regulatory Authority (Amendment) Bill into the National Assembly. The objective of the Bill is to amend the Gambling Regulatory Authority Act with a view to revamping the horse racing activities. The Gambling Regulatory Authority Act will be amended to review and spell out clearly the roles and responsibilities of the Gambling Regulatory Authority in connection with its regulatory, licensing, monitoring and enforcement functions regarding the horse racing activities as well as the horse racing organiser. Amendments are also being made to bring changes to other provisions relating to horse racing. Provision is also being made for a new administrative set up at the Gambling Regulatory Authority with seven divisions to be under the control of the Chief Executive of the Gambling Regulatory Authority, one of which will be the Horse Racing Integrity Division which will be responsible to protect the integrity of horse racing and ensure that horse racing is fair, clean and free from corruption or malpractice. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Letter of Agreement between the Department of Civil Aviation and Airservices Australia with a view to ensuring smooth and continuous progress of air traffic across the Mauritian airspace. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note of the National Preparedness Plan for Viral Haemorrhagic Fever: Ebola Virus Disease and Marburg Virus Disease. The purpose of the plan is to prevent and control the Ebola and Marburg Virus Diseases in Mauritius, including Rodrigues and the Outer Islands. The plan consists of three main parts, namely, the preparedness phase, the mitigation phase and the recovery phase, thus providing the strategic orientations for actions to be taken for the prevention and containment of Ebola and Marburg Virus Diseases. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note that the Mauritius Cane Industry Authority (Costs of Transport of Canes for Small Planters) Regulations 2025 would be promulgated to provide for transport charges payable by small sugarcane planters. Page 2 of 2 The transport charges would be applicable as from Crop 2025. The guiding principle of the mechanism is to set a maximum chargeable price for a fixed range of distances, taking into consideration the lower road rate for the transit of cane during harvest season which is determined by the Control and Arbitration Committee of the Mauritius Cane Industry Authority in the month of January of each year using the Consumer Price Index. The lower road rate is paid by millers if the distance from the small planters’ field to the mill or the collection site is in excess of 6.4 Km. The lower road rate for Crop 2025 has been fixed at Rs9.14/Km. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note that, as from 01 July 2025, owners of private vehicles and company vehicles would be required to renew their Motor Vehicle Licence through the enhanced online Motor Vehicle Licence system. Persons who do not have the necessary IT facilities may call at the post offices for assistance to renew their Motor Vehicle Licence through the online system. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the organisation of a Sales Exhibition for Women Entrepreneurs by the National Women Entrepreneur Council at the Main Alley of the Victoria Urban Terminal, Port Louis from 25 to 27 June 2025, with a view to encouraging the development and growth of women entrepreneurs in Mauritius. This initiative would be beneficial to women entrepreneurs by providing them with the opportunity to uplift their businesses, promote their locally made products, meet potential buyers, contract orders and build business networks. Local and handmade agro items, handicrafts, recycled crafts, textile products, amongst others would be on sale at the exhibition. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the – (a) Board of the Financial Services Commission; (b) Pharmacy Council of Mauritius; (c) Traditional Medicine Board, with Mr Parmanand Mawah, Permanent Secretary as part-time Chairperson; (d) Mental Health Commission, with Mr Rajesh Unnuth as part-time Chairperson; (e) Taxi Operators Welfare Fund, with Mr Ka Yee Leung Tak Wan as part-time Chairperson; and (f) Road Transport Advisory Board, with Mr Ham Sharma Kowlessur as part-time Chairperson. *****