Page 1 of 7 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING - FRIDAY 29 AUGUST 2025 1. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Radiation Safety and Nuclear Security (Occupational Radiation Protection) Regulations 2025. The main objective of the Regulations is to ensure adequate protection of all radiation workers by setting out requirements for - (a) individual monitoring of radiation workers; (b) monitoring of workplace; (c) health surveillance of radiation workers; (d) provision of Personal Protective Equipment to radiation workers; and (e) training on radiation safety for radiation workers. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Environment (Amendment of Schedule) Regulations 2025. The aim of the Regulations is to amend item 16 of Part A of the Sixth Schedule to the Environment Act 2024, so that pursuant to section 30(1)(a) of the Environment Act, a Preliminary Environmental Report licence will no longer be required for undertakings relating to manufacture of plastic products from plastic sheets which result in minor environmental nuisances. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the Mauritius Ports Authority releasing two plots of land located at Fort George in favour of IndianOil (Mauritius) Ltd and the State Trading Corporation, respectively, for the construction of petroleum storage facilities. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note that following an alleged case of fish mortality in Grand Marais River and in the lagoon thereat near Denim de L’Ile Ltd, site visits were carried out by officers of the Police de L’Environnement, the Albion Fisheries Research Centre, the Poudre d’Or Fisheries Post and the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change, whereby it was observed that - (a) dead fish of different species such as mullet, carangue, rouget, breton, vieille gris were found only near the mouth of Grand Marais River at around 100 metres from the treated effluent discharge point of Denim de L’Ile Ltd; (b) the river water was clear; (c) no foul smell was detected; (d) no algal bloom was observed; and Page 2 of 7 (e) the treated effluent from Denim de L’Ile Ltd, being discharged in the sea, was clear. Cabinet has further taken note that based on preliminary observations and findings so far, it would appear that the dead fish carcasses may not be due to the water quality of Grand Marais River but rather might be an act of dumping. Investigation at the level of the Police Department is ongoing. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note of the case of Mrs Carol Flore-Smereczniak, who served as the United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burkina Faso, and who had been declared persona non grata following an official United Nations report that accused jihadi groups and government forces of abuses against children. Mrs Carol Flore-Smereczniak from Mauritius was appointed by the United Nations Secretary-General as the United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burkina Faso, with the host Government’s approval, starting her appointment on 19 July 2024. She has more than 20 years of experience in development, security, humanitarian, and conflict and post-conflict settings with the United Nations. Mrs Carol Flore-Smereczniak is the second senior UN official to be expelled by the junta. The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade has met Mrs Carol Flore-Smereczniak on Friday, 29 August 2025. *** 6. Cabinet has agreed to the hosting of the African Union of Broadcasting - United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation Training Courses on Disaster Risk Reduction Reporting in Small Island Developing States and Media and Information Literacy by the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation from 27 to 30 October 2025. The main objectives of the training course are to - (a) strengthen cooperation between media outlets for better coverage of disaster risk reduction and media information literacy; and (b) share best practices in information and raising awareness on contemporary best practices in media operations. The training course will bring together over 30 international journalists across Africa, as well as representatives from United Nations Organisations and Non- Governmental Organisations. *** Page 3 of 7 7. Cabinet has taken note that the digital platform “Observatoire de L’Environnement” for the Republic of Mauritius will be launched in September 2025. The “Observatoire de L’Environnement”, developed with the assistance of the Agence Française de Développement, is a dynamic digital platform, which serves as an interface and communicates with all stakeholders, including the public, on environmental parameters, for the purpose of – (a) environmental monitoring and management; (b) development and evaluation of environmental policies; and (c) dissemination of environmental information. Cabinet has also taken note of the constitution of the Science to Policy Platform with Dr François Benjamin Vincent Florens, OSK, as Chairperson. *** 8. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius hosting a National Workshop on e-commerce on 04 and 05 November 2025, which will be conducted by the World Trade Organisation. The aim of the National Workshop on e-commerce is to address challenges being faced by Mauritius such as limited technical expertise in digital trade policy, which collectively hinder the country’s full and effective engagement in WTO e- commerce discussions, by providing participants with the necessary knowledge and skills to advocate Mauritius’ interests effectively within the ongoing e-commerce negotiations. Some 40 participants from Government, private sector, civil society, and academia are expected to benefit from the Workshop. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the organisation of the ‘POLY-CHAR (Mauritius) 2025 - Polymeric materials meet nanobiotechnology’ international conference by the Centre for Biomedical and Biomaterials Research at the University of Mauritius from 01 to 05 September 2025. POLY-CHAR is a non-profit and non-governmental organisation composed of a five-member Executive Committee and a 40-member scientific committee from across the globe. POLY-CHAR, rooted in polymer synthesis, characterisation, processing, application, recycling, education and its environmental/social consequences plays an important role in unifying polymer scientists across the world. Page 4 of 7 The international conference will offer a forum for researchers, including professors, young scientists, students and experts from industries as well as from academia to exchange, reflect and collaborate on themes spanning from polymers in the biometrical field, circular economy of polymers and environmental sustainability and polymers in agriculture in line with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Around 120 participants, both local and international, are expected to take part in the conference. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note that the Office of the President, in collaboration with the Ministry of Education and Human Resource and the Ministry of Information Technology, Communication and Innovation will organise a “Learn AI Innovation Challenge”. The “Learn AI Innovation Challenge”, which will be launched on 08 September 2025, is a pioneering national initiative emanating from a Private Public Partnership, in collaboration with Dayforce, Doracrea, and Mauritius Telecom. It is designed to tackle a critical challenge - equipping our youth to thrive in an AI-driven world, as part of the National Digital Transformation Blueprint and National Budget 2025-2026 “AI-for-ALL” campaign. The initiative will comprise a full day training by industry experts and presentation of practical solutions by leveraging AI in one of the following themes - (a) Food Security; (b) Healthcare Access; (c) Road Safety; (d) Inclusive Education; (e) Blue Economy; and (f) Public Sector Innovation. *** 11. Cabinet has agreed to the University of Mauritius signing Memoranda of Understanding with - (a) the Indian Institute of Plantation Management, Bengaluru, India; and (b) the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India. The Memoranda of Understanding aim to establish opportunities for collaboration in, inter alia, the following areas - Page 5 of 7 (a) academic staff collaboration in research, teaching and learning in areas of common interest; (b) assessment of units for credit for prior learning for academic programme offered at each institution; and (c) development and implementation of student mobility programme. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the activities that will be organised by the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change in the context of the “International Day for the Preservation of the Ozone Layer 2025”, which is celebrated annually on 16 September. The theme for this year is “From Science to Global Action”. The Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change will hold a series of activities from September 2025 to March 2026 including - (a) a one-day Workshop with importers and servicing/maintenance companies of refrigeration and air conditioning equipment and refrigerants on Tuesday 16 September 2025; (b) radio quiz with short messages on the protection of the ozone layer during the week of 15 to 19 September 2025 on five radio channels, namely, Radio Plus, Radio One, Best FM, Wazaa FM and Top FM; (c) an Open Day at the Université des Mascareignes, Camp Le Vieux, with the aim of promoting climate-friendly technology in the refrigeration and air-conditioning in natural refrigerants technologies by showcasing achievements through exhibits by the Université des Mascareignes, the Mauritius Institute of Training and Development and private companies; (d) a live painting competition for children and holding of an exhibition on the evolution of the ozone hole after 40 years; and (e) a roundtable discussion with the private sector in collaboration with Business Mauritius, to secure the involvement of high level management of companies in the Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning sector to sensitise on the Kigali Implementation Plan and showcase best practices. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent official visit of the Minister of Land Transport to Rodrigues, which had the prime objective of assessing road safety issues on the island. During his official visit, the Minister of Land Transport, inter alia, - Page 6 of 7 (a) attended the launch of a permanent traffic playground at Oyster Bay Government School, a first of its kind in Rodrigues; (b) launched the upgraded Online Motor Vehicle Licence system, a more user-friendly platform accessible to residents; and (c) visited a blackspot near Cave Petite Butte, in respect of which, the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit will recommend remedial measures to the Commission for Public Infrastructure, to address safety concerns at that location. The Minister of Land Transport also had courtesy meetings with the Chief Commissioner of Rodrigues and the Deputy Chief Commissioner of Rodrigues whereby discussions were held on issues such as the 20-year Land Transport Masterplan, the new Fitness Centre as well as road signs and markings. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Junior Minister, Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change in the Ministerial Segment of the second part of the Fifth Session of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC 5.2) which was held in Geneva, Switzerland. The objective of the INC 5.2 was to develop an international legally binding instrument on plastic pollution, including in the marine environment. The Junior Minister participated in various meetings including - (a) a high-level Alliance of Small Island States Ministers and High-Level Delegates meeting; (b) an informal round table on the “Challenges at national level to address plastic pollution”, where she intervened to highlight the achievements of Mauritius to combat plastic pollution but also the difficulties faced as a Small Island Developing State, and reiterated the expectations of the country; (c) an informal round table on the “Best practices and innovations, and partnership opportunities to address plastic pollution”; and (d) plenary sessions, where she, inter alia, stressed on the expectations of the Republic of Mauritius and reaffirmed the efforts and collaboration of Mauritius to work with the Chair and all delegations to deliver a plastic treaty aligned with Resolution 5/14. Cabinet further took note that in the absence of consensus, the Session of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee was adjourned and would be resumed at a future date. *** Page 7 of 7 15. Cabinet has taken note of the findings in the Report on Technical Assistance to Further Enhance the Development of the Leather Value Chain in Mauritius, which has been prepared by the Africa Leather and Leather Products Institute. The findings of the Report present a comprehensive assessment of the leather value chain in Mauritius. They highlight the various factors impeding the development of the leather sector by micro, small and medium enterprises, as well as the need for targeted interventions to reposition the sector as a competitive, export-oriented contributor to national industrial diversification. In order to craft out policies to give effect to the recommendations of the Report, a Steering Committee will be set up under the chair of the Permanent Secretary of the SME Division of the Ministry of Industry, SME and Cooperatives, comprising the Academy of Design and Innovation, the Mauritius Standards Bureau and other stakeholders. *** 16. Cabinet has taken note of the appointment of - (a) Mrs Marie Alexandra Caroline Arekion, as Director of the Special Education Needs Authority; and (b) Mr Pierre Noël Richard Nemorin, as Director of the Institute of Technical Education and Technology. *****