Page 1 of 2 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 25 APRIL 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note of the message of condolences that the Prime Minister had conveyed to Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic of India in the aftermath of the heinous and brutal terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir Pahalgam region, resulting in the loss of lives and causing injuries to many innocent people. Cabinet also associated itself with the plea of the Prime Minister that such dastardly and despicable acts committed by terrorists must be condemned without reserve. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to instructions being conveyed to the Attorney-General’s Office for the drafting of the Domestic Abuse Bill which would eventually repeal the existing Protection from Domestic Violence Act. The salient features of the new Domestic Abuse Bill would be – (a) definitions would be broadened to include other relationships such as intimate partners not living under the same roof; (b) introduction of a mandatory reporting clause whereby professionals suspecting acts of domestic abuse would have the mandatory obligation to report the matter; (c) definition of the different forms of abuse including physical, financial, sexual and psychological abuse; (d) introduction of a Protection Notice to be issued by the Police for cases reported during the night or weekend to protect the victim from further acts of domestic violence pending the issue of a Protection Order; (e) Enforcement Officers would be empowered to make application for Orders on behalf of victims who are unable to do so; (f) Police Officers would be able to access into the place of residence and accompany the victim inside to take his/her belonging; (g) a statement may be made on the case in any Police Station, irrespective of where the incident of violence occurred; and (h) counselling and rehabilitation programme would be made mandatory for perpetrators. *** Page 2 of 2 3. Cabinet has taken note that Monday 05 May 2025 would be declared a “No School Day” in view of the Municipal City Council and Municipal Town Elections 2025 scheduled on Sunday 04 May 2025. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note that a contract for cleaning of Ile aux Bénitiers islet had been awarded. Cleaning works were ongoing and were expected to be completed within 20 days. Some 50 operators would, thereafter, be authorised to carry out their activities anew on the islet without erecting any permanent structure. The Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change would be responsible for the management of the islet pending the finalisation of a Masterplan by the Ministry of Housing and Lands. A Ministerial Delegation led by the Deputy Prime Minister would effect a site visit on the islet on 27 April 2025 to take stock of the situation. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note that Pomponette Beach would be proclaimed as Public Beach, in accordance with section 2 of the Beach Authority Act. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Land Transport had set up three sub- committees to formulate proposals that could be considered for the re-introduction of an improved version of the Penalty Points System, which had been replaced by the Cumulative Road Traffic Offences System in July 2015, as follows – (a) the first Sub-Committee would review the provisions of the Road Traffic (Amendment) Act which then dealt with the Penalty Points System. Amendments would be proposed, where necessary, to make the legislation more responsive to present needs in terms of traffic behaviour, and to ease the administration of the system to be introduced; (b) the second Sub-Committee would look into the IT issues relating to the introduction of the system, as well as in the administrative process and distribution of the Penalty Points Certificate, commonly known as the Driving Licence Counterpart, and legislative amendments that would be required in relation thereto; and (c) the third Sub-Committee would review the schedule of traffic offences and the points allocation in relation thereto, and propose an amended schedule to be considered in the revamped Penalty Points System. ********