Page 1 of 9 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING - FRIDAY 26 SEPTEMBER 2025 1. Cabinet has agreed to the Commission of Experts, set up to make recommendations to reform the various pillars of the pension system, including the revamping of the National Pensions Fund (NPF) to replace the Contribution Sociale Généralisée (CSG), to be constituted as follows - (a) Mr Nureshkumar Prayag, Actuary as Chairperson; (b) Mr Bernard Yen, Actuary; (c) Mr Azad Jeetun, Economist; (d) Mrs Verena Tandrayen-Ragoobur, Economist; (e) Mr Sattar Jackaria, Actuary; (f) Mr Yvan Legris, Actuary; and (g) Ms Li Fa (Aimé) Cheung Kai Suet, Statistician. According to its Terms of Reference which have been worked out in consultation with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, the Commission of Experts will review the Portable Retirement Gratuity Fund, the National Savings Fund, the Statutory Bodies Pension Funds, the Civil Service Defined Benefits and Defined Contribution Pension Schemes, the Family Protection Schemes as well as pension schemes for public officials. The Commission will look into the revamping of the NPF to replace the CSG. In addition, the Commission will assist in defining a long-term strategy for the financial sustainability of the pension system and will provide - (a) an Actuarial and Fiscal Sustainability Report, showing the long-term projections of pension liabilities and expenditures over a 20-30-year horizon; and (b) a Cost-Benefit Analysis by comparing the existing contributory pension system with potential alternative models. Cabinet has further agreed to the setting up of a Steering Committee on Pension Reform which will provide guidance to the Commission on the strategic direction and policy priorities for the reform of the pension system; and assess and act on the recommendations of the Commission, under the chair of the Prime Minister and the following members - (a) the Deputy Prime Minister; (b) the Minister of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries; (c) the Minister of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity; Page 2 of 9 (d) the Minister of Financial Services and Economic Planning; (e) the Minister of Labour and Industrial Relations; (f) the Minister of Industry, SME and Cooperatives; (g) the Junior Minister of Finance; and (h) the Junior Minister of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note that in accordance with section 87 of the Constitution, the Prime Minister has advised the President of the Republic to appoint the following Minister Counsellor/Deputy High Commissioner as Ambassador - (a) Mrs Gajjaluxmi Mootoosamy; and (b) Mr Nilkanthsing Jagarnath. The Prime Minister has also advised the President of the Republic to appoint Mr Mohummad Riad Parvez Hullemuth as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Mauritius to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, with residence in Riyadh. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note that the report of the Committee of Inquiry set up to look into allegations regarding the allocation of Hadj 2025 visas by the Islamic Cultural Centre Trust Fund will be made public. The Ministry of Arts and Culture will follow up closely with the Islamic Cultural Centre Trust Fund for the implementation of recommendations and possible disciplinary and legal proceedings as per the advice of the Attorney-General’s Office. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the proclamation of section 31, sub-sections (1) and (3), of the Animal Welfare Act, which relates to the registration of dogs. The effective date for the proclamation shall be as from 01 October 2025. The implementation of the regulatory framework for the compulsory registration would allow the Mauritius Society for Animal Welfare to promote sustainable control of dog population in Mauritius, enhance responsible pet ownership, reduce animal cruelty and minimise health hazards associated with stray animals. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Land (Duties and Taxes) (Amendment of Schedule) Regulations 2025 which will exempt the beneficiary of a Page 3 of 9 housing unit of the National Housing Development Company Ltd from the payment of registration duty and the tax on transfer of leasehold rights in State land, provided that the value of the property does not exceed Rs5 million. The current exemption threshold is set at Rs2 million, with an annual review based on the construction price index. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the promulgation of the following regulations which provide for the implementation of measures mentioned in Budget 2025-2026 relating to revenue laws as well as other policy and technical measures - (a) Customs (Amendment No. 2) Regulations 2025; (b) Excise (Amendment) Regulations 2025; (c) Value Added Tax (Amendment) Regulations 2025; (d) Excise (Amendment of Schedule) Regulations 2025; (e) Customs Tariff (Amendment of Schedule) (No. 4) Regulations 2025; (f) Companies (Payment of Fees to Registrar) (Amendment) Regulations 2025; (g) Limited Liability Partnerships (Fees) (Amendment) Regulations 2025; (h) Limited Partnerships (Fees) (Amendment) Regulations 2025; (i) Foundations (Amendment of Schedule) Regulations 2025; and (j) Income Tax (Amendment No. 2) Regulations 2025. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Consumer Protection (Control of Imports) (Amendment No. 3) Regulations 2025 with a view to updating the list of Competent Authorities that are mandated to certify inspection of second-hand motor vehicles prior to shipment. *** 8. Cabinet has agreed to the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) 3.0 for the Republic of Mauritius and its submission to the Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The NDC 3.0 represents a critical opportunity to raise mitigation and adaptation ambitions to the highest degree possible in line with national circumstances and create enabling conditions to accelerate implementation, attract climate finance and establish ownership across sectoral ministries, private sectors and the public at large. Page 4 of 9 The NDC 3.0 highlights the commitments of Mauritius to set out the required framework to ensure a just socio-ecological transition in the country. As a Small Island Developing State, adaptation to climate change impacts is a priority for Mauritius. The adaptation commitments in the NDC 3.0, aligned with the Global Goal on Adaptation, has proposed specific measures to build resilience in vital sectors, namely - (a) water; (b) coastal zone management; (c) tourism; (d) infrastructure; (e) disaster risk reduction; (f) agriculture; (g) terrestrial ecosystem and biodiversity; (h) fisheries and marine ecosystem; (i) health; and (j) gender and social inclusion. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the 38th edition of the Global Financial Centres Index (GFCI 38) which provides evaluation of 120 financial centres around the world. Mauritius has improved its position in the GFCI 38, now ranking 52nd globally and has climbed 6 places from its 58th position in the GFCI 37 (March 2025) and 60th position in the GFCI 36 (September 2024). Furthermore, Mauritius has also made significant progress in its score rating increasing by 13 points. Regionally, Mauritius has strengthened its standing, now ranking 3rd in the Middle East and Africa. Mauritius continues to be recognised among the 15 financial centres most likely to gain significance over the next two to three years. *** 10. Cabinet has agreed to the publication of the General Notice providing for the date of entry into force of the Protocol amending the Double Taxation Avoidance Convention (DTAC) with the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh. The main objective of the Protocol is to make the DTAC between Mauritius and Bangladesh compliant with the Base Erosion and Profit Shifting minimum standards of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and increase the flow of investments between the two countries. *** Page 5 of 9 11. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Financial Crimes Commission of the Republic of Mauritius and the Basel Institute on Governance. The objectives of the Memorandum of Understanding are, inter alia, to - (a) strengthen the efforts of the Financial Crimes Commission to identify and recover assets which have been obtained through corruption, organised crime, abuse of power, financial or economic crime, drug related offences or other forms of criminal activity; (b) facilitate the development of plans and strategies to effectively investigate offences of corruption, abuse of power, financing of drug dealing and financial or economic crime; and (c) facilitate the obtaining of intelligence and evidence from other jurisdictions, for use in support of domestic investigations, prosecutions or confiscation/ forfeiture applications. *** 12. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the National Audit Office of the Republic of Mauritius and the National Audit Office of the Republic of Gambia. The objective of the Memorandum of Understanding is to create an avenue for the provision of technical assistance and exchange programmes between both institutions to strengthen professional capacity in the fields of - (a) public sector methodologies including emerging areas; and (b) the accrual reporting system of the international public sector accounting standards to staff of the National Audit Office (Gambia). *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised to mark World Heart Day 2025, which is observed globally every year on 29 September to raise awareness about heart diseases, which remain the leading cause of death worldwide. The theme for World Heart Day 2025 is “Don’t Miss a Beat,” which highlights the need for ongoing heart health awareness, encouraging individuals to pay attention to warning signs, maintain healthy habits, and get regular checkups. To commemorate World Heart Day 2025, the Ministry of Health and Wellness will organise the following activities - (a) launching of the report on the new cardiac registry; (b) celebration of the achievement of the cardiac unit of Dr A. G. Jeetoo Hospital for winning the African Outstanding Kaizen Award for Primary PCI, organised by the Embassy of Japan; Page 6 of 9 (c) screening for Non-Communicable Diseases; (d) demonstration of physical activity; (e) radio talks and TV programmes on the theme of World Heart Day, “Don’t Miss a Beat”; (f) talks and sensitisation campaigns at Community Health Centres, Women Centres, Social Welfare Centres, schools, and urban/rural community settings on the risk factors of heart diseases and preventive measures; and (g) exhibitions on healthy lifestyles and diets in collaboration with relevant stakeholders. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note that the Mauritius Accreditation Service (MAURITAS) will apply to the African Accreditation Cooperation (AFRAC) and, thereafter, to the International Accreditation Forum (IAF), to extend its scope of international recognition to cover the accreditation of conformity assessment bodies offering Information Security Management System (ISMS) certification schemes. MAURITAS is the national accreditation body of Mauritius and provides a national, unified service for the accreditation of laboratories, inspection bodies and certification bodies. MAURITAS draws its international recognition through its membership to the regional and global accreditation organisations such as AFRAC and IAF, respectively. Accreditation granted by MAURITAS is a formal recognition that an organisation is technically competent to perform specific tasks. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note of the status of social housing projects being implemented by the New Social Living Development Ltd and the National Housing Development Company Ltd as follows - (a) the construction of 774 housing units has been completed; (b) the construction of 2,357 housing units is expected to be completed by December 2025; (c) the construction of 5,244 housing units is expected to be completed by July 2026; and (d) the construction of 70 housing units has not yet started on one site. The Ministry of Housing and Lands is in the process of identifying suitable sites for new housing projects. *** Page 7 of 9 16. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Information Technology, Communication and Innovation will hold a workshop on Cybersecurity in Mauritius with the assistance of Indian Officials from the Maharashtra Cyber Department who will share their knowledge, insights and experience with the objective of enhancing the cyber security eco-system in Mauritius. Representatives of the Prime Minister’s Office, the Mauritius Police Force, the Attorney-General’s Office as well as officers of the Ministry of Information Technology, Communication and Innovation, the Computer Emergency Response Team (Mauritius) and the Information and Communication Technologies Authority will be invited to participate in the workshop. *** 17. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Energy and Public Utilities in the high-level delegation led by the Prime Minister to India, to explore possibilities of cooperation in the energy sector. The Minister had the opportunity to, inter alia, hold bilateral meetings with the Union Minister of Power and Housing and Urban Affairs, the Minister of Power and Renewable Energy, the Chairman and Managing Director of the National Thermal Power Corporation Limited as well as the Director General of the International Solar Alliance. In line with the Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of Mauritius and the Government of India in the field of power sector, both sides underscored the importance of strengthening bilateral cooperation in the energy sector. Priority areas include energy security, renewable energy development, power generation, transmission, grid management, and capacity building. *** 18. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Tertiary Education, Science and Research in the Global Smart Education Conference 2025 on the theme “Human-AI Collaboration: Reshaping Education for the Future”, in China. In addition to his participation in the Ministerial Roundtable, the Minister chaired a dedicated AI-panel at the conference. He also delivered an academic presentation entitled: “The Mission and Strategic Transformation of Universities in the Age of AI”. The Minister visited the Huawei ICT Academy and the Alibaba Cloud Academy and engaged in discussions on equipping university students with industry- relevant ICT and AI skills through micro-credential courses. *** Page 8 of 9 19. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Tertiary Education, Science and Research in the Eleventh Pan- Commonwealth Forum on Open Learning (PCF II) Botswana on the theme “Innovative Open Education: Fostering Resilient Societies for Sustainable Economic Development”. The Minister chaired three Ministerial panels and facilitated strategic deliberations on the particular needs of small states in the digital education sphere. He also participated in the Ministerial Panel on employability and credentialing where he shared Mauritius’ pioneering work in micro-credentials, national skills development programme, employability skills, free education and free transport. During the PCF II, the Minister was conferred an Honorary Fellow of the Commonwealth of Learning. The Forum also served as a platform for Mauritius to officially launch the National Open Educational Resources Repository of Mauritius. The Pan Commonwealth Forum concluded with the release of the PCF11 Gaborone Statement which advocates for “One Resilient Common Future”, supporting and prioritising a series of collective actions. *** 20. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Information Technology, Communication and Innovation in the high-level delegation headed by the Prime Minister to India. On the sidelines of the high-level meetings and official events, the Minister had several meetings to discuss projects that have been highlighted in the Digital Transformation Blueprint 2025-2029 for Mauritius, with namely the Chief Minister of Maharashtra; officials of the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team; the Centre for Development of Telematics; and the National Informatics Centre. Discussions were centered around, inter alia - (a) support in fighting cyber frauds, scams and other online crimes by using preventive methods and software; (b) establishment of guidelines for proper usage of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and creating public awareness on AI as well as further upgrading of the online crime reporting system; and (c) implementation of an early warning system for better communication and preparation against natural disasters. *** 21. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Arts and Culture in the 9th International Dharma-Dhamma Conference in India. The Conference was organised by the India Foundation, in collaboration with Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Open University on the theme “Karma, Reincarnation, Page 9 of 9 Transmigration and The Avatar Doctrine”. The objective of the conference was to bring together religious, political and thought leaders to ponder over building a philosophical framework for the emerging new world order. The Minister addressed the inaugural session of the Conference, where he underlined Mauritius’ identity as a multicultural and multireligious society and highlighted the importance of dialogue and shared values in strengthening international cooperation. In the margins of the Conference, the Minister held discussions on possible avenues of collaboration with cultural and academic representatives, more particularly in the field of music and dance through capacity-building and training programmes in Indian classical dance and folk music with possibilities for masterclasses in Mauritius. *** 22. Cabinet has taken note of the - (a) appointment of Mr Meghanathan Pillay, CSK as Executive Chairperson of Airport Holdings Limited; and (b) reconstitution of the Professional Architects’ Council for the period 2025-2027. *****