Page 1 of 7 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING - FRIDAY 18 JULY 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note that a Special Meeting of Cabinet will be held on Saturday 19 July 2025 to examine the Draft Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Criminal Appeal and Criminal Review Bill into the National Assembly. The main object of the Bill is to clarify, simplify and standardise the procedures for all appeals in criminal matters made - (a) to the Court of Criminal Appeal from the final decision of the Supreme Court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction in criminal matters; and (b) to the Supreme Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction in criminal mattes from the final decision of the subordinate court, such as the District Court, the Intermediate Court, the Industrial Court or the Criminal Division of the Children’s Court. and to bring together such appeal procedures into one consolidated legislation. The Bill will bring clarity and certainty in this area of the law, given that the procedures for making appeals in criminal matters are scattered in different pieces of legislation and are not uniform. Accordingly, the Bill - (a) imposes an obligation on any Court, immediately after it gives judgment in a criminal matter, to notify the convicted party of his right to appeal; and (b) clarifies the procedure to make an application for review of the proceedings of the Supreme Court to the Court of Criminal Appeal relating to an acquittal or conviction. In addition, the Criminal Appeal Act and the Criminal Appeal Rules 1954 will be repealed, and the Children’s Court Act 2020, the Courts Act, the District and Intermediate Courts (Criminal Jurisdiction) Act and the Protection of Human Rights Act will be amended. The Criminal Procedure Act is also being amended to impose an obligation on any Court to pass sentence on a convicted person not later than 28 days after conviction, thus filling a void in this area of the law. *** Page 2 of 7 3. Cabinet has taken note that the Central Electricity Board (CEB) has invited applications from eligible customers wishing to benefit from the - (a) implementation of some 1,000 kits of solar photovoltaic equipment free of charge in respect of - (i) Phase 2 of the CEB Renewable Energy Scheme for religious bodies; and (ii) Phase 2 of the CEB Renewable Energy Scheme for Non- Governmental Organisations and Charitable Institutions; (b) implementation of some 2,000 kits of solar photovoltaic equipment free of charge in respect of Phase 2B of the CEB Home Solar Project for individual households satisfying the following criteria - (i) registered on the Social Register of Mauritius; (ii) beneficiaries of allowances from the National Social Inclusion Foundation; (iii) residents/tenants of a housing unit of the National Development Company Ltd or the New Social Living Development Ltd; (iv) eligible for the “Communities Engagement Programme (Projet éco-village) of the CEB; and (v) registered on the Social Tariff of the CEB (Tariff 110A). *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to making public the Report of the Fact Finding Committee on L’Oiseau Du Paradis Relay Centre, Cap Malheureux and Management of Residential Care Institutions. The Fact Finding Committee had been set up in November 2022 further to the incident relating to Baby S. to, inter alia - (a) investigate into the circumstances leading to the minor being admitted to Neo-Natal Intensive Care Unit; (b) investigate on the management of and services being provided to the minor; (c) investigate on the management of residential care institutions/shelters for children falling under the purview of the National Children’s Council, in general; and (d) make recommendations for - (i) addressing shortcomings identified; (ii) reforms to be brought with regard to the procedures for the placement of minors in residential institutions/shelters for children; and (iii) the management of residential institutions/shelters for children. Page 3 of 7 The Fact Finding Committee submitted recommendations with regard to - (a) negligence on the part of caregivers at L’Oiseau du Paradis Relay Centre; (b) assistance to be provided to Baby S and the biological mother; (c) the management of residential care institutions; (d) role of the National Children’s Council; (e) the institutional set up in place for child protection and development services; and (f) amendments to be brought to the existing legal framework. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note of the coming into operation of the Fixed Penalty Notice System under the Roads Act, as from 01 September 2025, which aims at - (a) deterring habitual offenders under the Roads Act by introducing the prospect of additional sanctions; (b) providing an efficient and cost-effective justice system; (c) diverting minor offences from the Court system; and (d) avoiding lengthy and tedious judicial procedures by issuing quick fines, thereby modernising the administration of justice. The offences under the Fixed Penalty System include, inter alia, - (a) illegal hawkers encroaching on the road or its reserves; (b) illegal discharge of storm water or waste water from private premises onto the road; (c) illegal stacking of material on footpath and road; (d) flyposting; and (e) unauthorised access. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Land Transport will disseminate, during a working session with bus operators and other relevant stakeholders, salient information on the implementation of a Fleet Management System for public buses and the preparation of a Bus Services Industry Bill. Page 4 of 7 The Fleet Management System will allow for real-time tracking of buses, improve bus route planning, monitor driver behaviour, ensure timely maintenance of buses, reduce operational costs, and enhance passenger satisfaction. The system will also assist the National Land Transport Authority to better manage the payment of subsidies including Free Travel Compensation and Diesel Subsidies. The Ministry of Land Transport will hold consultations on the Bus Service Industry Bill which aims at providing a consolidated legal framework to ensure the smooth implementation of the Fleet Management System and a Passenger Information System, while catering for a safe, reliable, responsive and sustainable public bus transport system for the benefit of the commuters. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to amendments being brought to the Consumer Protection (Importation and Sale of Second-hand Motor Vehicles) Regulations 2004 to extend the current restriction on the issuance of new authorised dealers’ licences for the importation and sale of second-hand motor vehicles for an additional period of one year, up to 30 June 2026. A Ministerial Committee would be set up to consider a new regulatory framework governing the issuance of authorised dealers’ licences, including revised licensing conditions. The new framework aims to - (a) ensure that any expansion of dealership licences fosters a healthier competitive environment, resulting in better prices and improved service standards for consumers; (b) consider the possibility to streamline procedures for industry operators and SMEs to import vans, dual-purpose vehicles, goods vehicles (trucks and lorries), motorbuses, and special purpose vehicles, while addressing the current demand–supply gap; (c) promote a sustainable business model that benefits all stakeholders over the long term; (d) strengthen consumer protection measures proportionate to the value of the purchase made; and (e) prevent the unauthorised entry of imported second-hand motor vehicles. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that the Medical Council (Medical Institutions) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 would be promulgated to provide for the change of appellation of the ‘Kasturba Medical College, Manipal University’ into that of ‘Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Karnataka, formerly known as Kasturba Medical College, Manipal University’. *** Page 5 of 7 9. Cabinet has agreed to the existing legislative framework for regulating the organisation of Trade Fairs being reviewed to - (a) provide for licensing framework to authorise the holding of trade fairs; and (b) introduce more effective and stringent measures to ensure the economic stability of the retail industry. The Ministry of Commerce and Consumer Protection will introduce a licensing framework for companies organising Trade Fairs in Mauritius. The framework will aim at ensuring that such activities take place in a well-regulated environment that minimises market disruptions while promoting a level playing field for all retailers. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the findings of the report of the Internal Enquiry Committee on the absconding of three minors from Shelter L’Oiseau du Paradis, Cap Malheureux on 01 June 2025. The report of the Internal Enquiry Committee comprise, inter alia, the following observations - (a) there was lack of security monitoring; (b) the absconding was due to alleged gross negligence from the caregivers; (c) the ‘prise en charge’ of the minors was unsatisfactory; (d) overzealousness of certain staff of the shelter was left unchecked by the National Children’s Council; (e) the was no effective supervision on the shelter by the National Children’s Council; (f) there was an abuse of overtime which may amount to dilapidation of funds; (g) illegal video recording of minors was a frequent feature; and (h) command and control were absent from the supervising staff of the National Children’s Council. The Ministry of Gender Equality and Family Welfare is following up on the recommendations made by the Committee with the National Children’s Council. *** 11. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Health and Wellness signing a Clinical Training Framework Agreement with the IOMIT’S SSR Medical College. The aim of the Clinical Training Framework Agreement is, inter alia, to - Page 6 of 7 (a) establish a structured collaboration to facilitate the clinical training of medical students from IOMIT’S SSR Medical College at Victoria Hospital and specialised hospitals; (b) ensure the clinical training is carried out under appropriate supervision, in line with the guidelines of the Ministry of Health and Wellness and the Higher Education Commission; and (c) set out the responsibilities of the Ministry of Health and Wellness, IOMIT’S SSR Medical College and the students as well as the terms and conditions for the conduct of the training. *** 12. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Tertiary Education, Science and Research and the Department of Science and Technology of the Republic of India. The following activities will be undertaken, in line with the objectives of the Memorandum of Understanding - (a) experts and officials of the Department of Science and Technology will assist the Ministry of Tertiary Education, Science and Research and concerned stakeholders in the elaboration of a National Science and Technology Strategy; (b) concerned stakeholders will collaborate to develop the roadmap for the implementation of the National Science and Technology Strategy in Mauritius, with actionable steps, timelines and budgets; and (c) officials of the Ministry of Tertiary Education, Science and Research will benefit from the expertise and advice of the Indian party for the setting up of a Science and Technology Directorate, and also defining its mission and tasks. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of the 15th Best Practices Forum including the 31st Directors Joint Consultative Committee of the East, Central and Southern Africa Health Community from 04 to 06 August 2025, in Mauritius. The Best Practices Forum will bring together senior officials of the Ministry of Health of the participating Member States, policy makers, researchers health professionals from the private sector, representatives of regional and international organisations and universities, Non-Governmental Organisations, and other development partners to showcase, share as well as scale up best practices with a view to improving health outcomes in the East, Central and Southern Africa region. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the appointment of members of the Commission for Conciliation and Mediation for a period of two years. *** Page 7 of 7 15. Cabinet has taken of the reconstitution of the - (a) Board of Trustees of the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre Trust Fund, with Mr Partish Chumroo as part-time Chairperson; (b) Standards Council of the Mauritius Standards Bureau, with Mr Abdool Hakim Fakira as part-time Chairperson; (c) Executive Council of the Hindi-Speaking Union, with Dr Anjalee Chintamunnee as President; (d) Executive Council of the Marathi-Speaking Union, with Mr Bhalchandra Govind as President; (e) Executive Council of the Tamil-Speaking Union, with Mr Egambrum Nagapen as President; (f) Executive Council of the Arabic-Speaking Union, with Mr Kalim Oullah K. Wahedally as President; (g) Executive Council of the Creole-Speaking Union, with Prof. Louis Arnaud Carpooran as President; (h) Executive Council of the Chinese-Speaking Union, with Mr Marc Eric You Fook Lim Kian Siang, MSK as President; and (i) Executive Council of the Urdu-Speaking Union, with Ms Abidah Zainab Alladee as President. ******