Page 1 of 3 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 24 MAY 2024 1. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with the United Arab Emirates. The CEPA marks a significant step towards the consolidation of bilateral economic and trade ties between Mauritius and the United Arab Emirates. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the Second Session of the Mauritius- Madagascar Ministerial Joint Commission held in Mauritius on 17 May 2024 preceded by the Senior Officials' meetings on 15 and 16 May 2024. The following main issues were, inter alia, discussed during the Joint Commission – (a) Air Connectivity; (b) Economic and Commercial Cooperation; (c) Cooperation in Fisheries; (d) Cooperation in Agri-Food Sectors; (e) Illicit Trafficking Control; and (f) Health Issues. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the organisation of a study tour in Mauritius for representatives of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Somalia, Sudan and Yemen to learn from best practices in managing security and safety in the port. The study tour would be facilitated by Interpol and the Secretariat of the Indian Ocean Commission through the Red Sea Project, which aims at helping countries to develop capacities and to promote adequate security and safety standards for maritime, port and land-based law enforcement authorities. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note that a Mauritian delegation comprising athletes and officials were participating in the Kobe 2024 Para Athletics World Championships being held in Japan from 17 to 25 May 2024. Two Mauritian para-athletes won three medals, comprising one gold and two silver, namely Miss Noemi Alphonse, MSK who won gold and silver medals in the 100 M Wheel Chair and 400 M Wheel Chair, respectively and Miss Anaïs Angeline, who won silver medal in the long jump event. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note that Italy had included Mauritius among the beneficiary countries for scholarships (grants) to study in Italy for the academic year 2024-2025. The Ministry of Education, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology would publicise the call for scholarships. *** Page 2 of 3 6. Cabinet has taken note that Mauritius had made written and oral submissions to the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea in the context of the request for an Advisory Opinion on climate change submitted by the Commission of Small Island States on Climate Change and International Law. Cabinet further noted that, on 21 May 2024, the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea delivered its Advisory Opinion, in which it unanimously held that anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere constitute pollution of the marine environment and spelt out the obligations incumbent upon States Parties to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea to prevent, reduce and control marine pollution from such emissions, and to protect and preserve the marine environment from climate change impacts and ocean acidification. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised to commemorate World Ocean Day 2024 which is celebrated on 08 June every year. The theme for this year is “Awaken New Depths”. In that respect, the Ministry of Blue Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries and Shipping would release 10,000 fingerlings comprising 5,000 ‘Cordonnier’ and 5,000 ‘Silver Sea Bream’ during the period 05 to 15 June 2024 in the following Marine Protected Areas, in line with the Marine Ranching Programme, namely at Blue Bay Marine Park, Poste La Fayette Fishing Reserve, Black River Fishing Reserve, Grand Port Fishing Reserve and Balaclava Marine Park. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family Welfare in collaboration with the National Children’s Council in the context of the Day of the African Child 2024, which is celebrated on 16 June every year. The ‘16 Days 16 Rights’ Campaign would be launched during the month of June 2024 to sensitise primary and secondary school children on substance abuse. A forum on Education and Substance Abuse would be held on 13 June 2024 for around 120 secondary students between 12 to 18 years of age. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by the Ministry of Public Service, Administrative and Institutional Reforms to mark United Nations Public Service Day 2024, which is celebrated on 23 June every year. A national function would be held on Sunday 23 June 2024 at the Swami Vivekananda International Convention Centre, Pailles. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of the Indian Ocean Regional Consultative Workshop themed “Implementing Sustainable Low and Non-Chemical Development in SIDS (ISLANDS)” project from 12 to 14 June 2024 organised by the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme. The ISLANDS project aims to protect human health and the environment from the harmful effects of hazardous chemicals and wastes. Page 3 of 3 The Workshop would be attended by representatives of the public sector and national ISLANDS project teams from Union of Comoros, Maldives, Seychelles and Mauritius, along with associated regional and international experts as well as project partners. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note that, as at 23 May 2024, there were 206 active cases of Dengue Fever in Mauritius, of which 18 persons had been hospitalised in both public and private hospitals. For Rodrigues, 21 active cases of Dengue Fever had been recorded of which four persons were hospitalised. Cleaning of barelands, vector control activities as well as sensitisation were ongoing. Cabinet further noted that since 11 January 2024, 38 cases of Leptospirosis had been reported in Mauritius. There were presently five active cases as at 23 May 2024. The Ministry of Health and Wellness was conducting a sensitisation campaign in collaboration with relevant stakeholders, including the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation and relevant media on Leptospirosis. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the participation of the Attorney General, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the Extraordinary SADC Summit of Heads of State and Government on El Niño Phenomenon which was held virtually on 20 May 2024. Discussion focused on issues such as Weather Forecasting Infrastructure, Disasters and their Impacts, Water and Sanitation, Harmonisation of Food Safety Sanitary Standards and Regional Humanitarian Appeal. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Land Use Planning, Minister of Tourism in the South Africa’s annual travel fair in Durban, South Africa. The Deputy Prime Minister participated in the Tourism Dialogue session which provided a platform for stakeholders in the aviation and tourism industries to share insights and to explore avenues on how to work better for mutual benefit. In the margin of the Indaba event and the Tourism Dialogue, the Deputy Prime Minister had the opportunity to meet tour operators and airline companies. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Management Committee for the Probation Hostel for Boys and the Probation Home for Girls, with Mrs Nudhar Banu Bundhoo as part-time Chairperson. *******