Page 1 of 4 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 15 DECEMBER 2023 1. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a revised “Accord Cadre de Partenariat” between the Université des Mascareignes of Mauritius and the Université de Limoges of France to further strengthen their existing collaboration. An initial “Accord Cadre de Collaboration et de Partenariat” was signed in February 2013 and renewed in 2018 for collaboration in the fields of capacity building, research, innovation and good governance. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Agreement between the Academy of Design and Innovation of Mauritius and the Seychelles Institute of Art and Design for collaboration in the field of education and training. The Memorandum of Agreement aiming, amongst others, to strengthen cooperation in areas of mutual academic interest, would focus on - (a) exchange between academic and administrative staff for the purpose of research and delivering of lectures; (b) exchange of students to broaden their knowledge on the study programmes; (c) identifying opportunities for conducting collaborative research and development; (d) identifying opportunities for conducting lectures and seminars and jointly organising symposia and conferences; (e) exchange of academic information and materials; and (f) identifying opportunities to collaborate on the development of Joint Dual Awards. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note that Mauritius would submit the Second Country-level Report on the Status of Implementation of the African Union Agenda 2063, for the period 2013 to 2023, to the African Union Development Agency – New Partnership for Africa’s Development (AUDA-NEPAD) Secretariat. Page 2 of 4 Agenda 2063 is a set of strategic orientations to guide the development efforts of Africa over a period of 50 years. AU Member States are expected to submit, every two years, their Country-level Report on the status of implementation of Agenda 2063 to the AUDA-NEPAD Secretariat. The Country-level Reports are used by AUDA-NEPAD to prepare the Biennial Continental Reports on the Implementation of the Agenda 2063. The third Biennial Continental Report would be presented to the 37th Ordinary Session of the AU Assembly of Heads of State and Government in February 2024. The Country-level Report comprises, inter alia, a write-up on progress made, challenges, opportunities, lessons learnt under the Aspirations. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the implementation of the ‘Flood Mitigating Measures at Seeraully Road, Central Flacq’ project comprising, inter alia, the construction of reinforced concrete open drain, high floodwall and reinforced concrete wall. The project also provides for high chain-link fence on top of the wall of the reinforced concrete open drain and floodwalls, demolition and reconstruction of footbridges and two bridges across St Ursule Street and Flacq Traffic Centre (B119) Road and the temporary relocation of existing parking space along Flacq Traffic Centre (B119) Road. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note that the National Launch and Consultation Workshop on Early Warnings for All (EW4All), organised by the Mauritius Meteorological Services in collaboration with the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre, would be held on 19 and 20 December 2023. The objectives of the Workshop would be to, inter alia, – (a) review the current state of the Multi Hazard Emergency Alert System (MHEAS) in Mauritius and evaluate the progress in implementing the four pillars of EW4All; (b) explore the linkages and alignment among ongoing and upcoming initiatives, and consolidate key stakeholders’ commitments to strengthen MHEAS; (c) identify gaps in national early warning systems, with respect to the minimum core capabilities checklist tool provided by the EW4All initiative; (d) identify key challenges and barriers to effective, accessible and coherent MHEAS, and recommend targeted actions to overcome these, in line with national developmental priorities; and (e) establish a national coordination mechanism or affirm existing national coordination mechanism to guide efforts to scale-up early warning programming, and linking national and local engagement. *** Page 3 of 4 6. Cabinet has taken note that the ‘Environmental Charter for Secondary Schools’, elaborated by the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change would be disseminated to all secondary schools. The Charter outlined a wide array of pro-environmental actions and pledges that could be taken by students at home, at school and within the community. These actions were not exhaustive and had been grouped under thematic areas including the following - (a) energy conservation; (b) biodiversity conservation; (c) water conservation; (d) waste minimisation and recycling; (e) sustainable consumption; and (f) sustainable transportation. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the rolling out of the Digital Proficiency Course as from end of January 2024, by the Mauritius Digital Promotion Agency. The course would consist of a 45-hour comprehensive curriculum and would cover essential digital skills including modules of IT fundamentals, Office Productivity Tools, Online Essentials, Digital Transactions, Cyber Security, Privacy and Cyberlaw. The Digital Proficiency Course would be implemented in collaboration with the Ministry of Education, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology, the University of Mauritius and the Mauritius Institute of Education. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Public Service, Administrative and Institutional Reforms in the 42nd Annual Roundtable Conference of the African Association for Public Administration and Management (AAPAM) held in Livingstone, Zambia. The theme of the Conference was “Building Resilient Societies through Effective Governance and Public Administration in Africa: An imperative for the realisation of the SDGs and Agenda 2063 aspirations” and it underscored the imperative of evolving African public administration to meet the ambitious goals of the SDGs and Agenda 2063. The following recommendations were made during the Conference – (a) Strengthening Governance and Public Institutions; (b) Sustainable Development and Environmental Stewardship; Page 4 of 4 (c) Enhancing Public Administration; and (d) Regional Integration and African Continental Free Trade Area. The Conference also witnessed the 14th AAPAM Innovative Management Award Ceremony. The Innovative Management Award aims to promote excellence and best practice by recognising and celebrating institutional creativity in enhancing service delivery in the African continent. Mauritius won the third prize for the project “Gender Based Violence Protection Tool” and was the first Runner-up in the “E-HR” project. ******