Page 1 of 3 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 25 OCTOBER 2024 1. Cabinet has agreed to arrangements being made, in accordance with the provisions of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, for the setting up of a Commission of Inquiry to inquire into and report on a matter of public interest namely the alleged misuse of telecommunications infrastructure and the recent publications and/or broadcast of alleged telephone conversations on social media and other platforms. The Commission of Inquiry will be chaired by a former Judge and will have two foreign experts as Assessors. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note that, pursuant to the amendments brought to the State Lands Act through the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2023 and in the light of consultations held, the State Lands (Payment Facility) Regulations 2024 would be promulgated to enable the holder of an industrial or commercial site lease who is facing financial difficulties to benefit payment facilities in respect of arrears of rental. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note of the status of road capital projects being implemented by the Road Development Authority, as at 30 September 2024. Two projects had been completed while 17 projects were under construction and six projects were at procurement stage. The projects include, inter alia, – (a) the upgrading of B28 Road from Beau Champ to Bel Air, which was completed and opened to the public on 13 August 2024; (b) the construction of the Footbridge at Trianon near Margarine Industries Ltd, which was expected to be completed in May 2025; and (c) the slope stabilisation near Rivière des Anguilles Bridge, which was expected to be completed in November 2024. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of the Social Sciences International Research Conference, organised by the University of Mauritius in collaboration with the North-West University, South Africa, from 28 to 30 October 2024. The objective of the conference would be to connect researchers, academics, the business community and practitioners to share information, research findings and experiences on several aspects in the fields of management, law, finance, economics, education and emerging technologies. *** Page 2 of 3 5. Cabinet has taken note that the Mauritius Revenue Authority would host a Regional workshop on Integrity for the Eastern and Southern Africa (ESA) Region on 28 and 29 October 2024. The main objective of the workshop would be to ensure the adoption of ethical standards in line with global best practices for enhanced credibility and reputation of the region. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the status regarding the donation of 100 electric buses by the Government of India to be allocated to the National Transport Corporation. The design of the buses as well as the logos to be inserted thereon has been finalised. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the arrangements being made by the National Land Transport Authority for the payment of compensation to the five major bus companies in respect of the wage relativity adjustment. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that, on the invitation of the Electoral Commissioner, the African Union Commission, the Southern African Development Community and the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie would deploy Election Observer Missions to Mauritius, in the context of the forthcoming National Assembly Elections 2024. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the report of the Mauritius Meteorological Services (MMS) with regard to the seasonal outlook for summer 2024-2025 for Mauritius and Rodrigues. The main forecasts for the summer season 2024-2025 would be as follows – (a) temperatures would be slightly above the normal during summer 2024- 2025; (b) the onset of summer rain would be expected to be on time, that is, during the second fortnight of December 2024; (c) the number of named storms evolving in the South West Indian Ocean basin for the 2024-2025 cyclone season was likely to be between 11 and 13; (d) heavy swells generated by tropical cyclones evolving in the vicinity of the islands of Mauritius might affect the shores; and (e) between January to March 2025, atmospheric conditions would become conducive to the occurrence of extreme weather events, such as, violent thunderstorms and heavy rainfall. The updated summer 2024-2025 Seasonal Outlook Report would be released to the public by the MMS on 28 October 2024. *** Page 3 of 3 10. Cabinet has taken note that Mr Paul Lam Shang Leen, retired Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court of Mauritius had been elected to serve on the Subcommittee on the Prevention of Torture for the term January 2025 – December 2028. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the National Road Safety Council with Mrs Moheenee Nathoo, Senior Chief Executive of the Ministry of Land Transport and Light Rail, as part-time Chairperson. ********