Page 1 of 4 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 04 AUGUST 2023 1. Cabinet has agreed to the implementation of the National Service Framework for Non- Communicable Diseases 2023-2028 and the National Integrated Non-Communicable Disease Action Plan 2023-2028 which have been prepared with the technical assistance of the World Health Organization. The strategic objectives of the National Service Framework aim to – (a) achieve prevention of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs); (b) control and manage NCDs by providing strategic direction and engaging in Multi- Disciplinary Teams and partnerships, shaping the service provision at the Primary Health Care level and referral at higher levels; and (c) set norms and standards, monitor and conduct implementation research, articulate ethical and evidence-based service options, scale up proven technical interventions to improve health situation. The purpose of the Action Plan was to provide a tool for identifying barriers and opportunities for combatting NCDs and scaling up proven interventions through an implementation roadmap. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note of the Annual Health Statistics Report (HSR) for the year 2022 for Mauritius and Rodrigues. The HSR 2022 would provide evidence-based information and health indicators for the monitoring of the health of the population. The statistics would be used for decision making, policy formulation, development of strategies and evaluation of health programmes which enable the Ministry of Health and Wellness and various key stakeholders in the health sector to improve service delivery. The HSR 2022 contained information on population and vital statistics, health infrastructure, health personnel, maternal and child health, notifiable diseases, private health institutions, morbidity, infant and child mortality, mortality and other services in both the public and the private sectors. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Health and Wellness in collaboration with the World Community for Prevention of Diabetes Foundation, Spain and the Diabetes Foundation, Mauritius, would hold an international conference on diabetes and associated diseases from 22 to 24 January 2024 in Mauritius. The objective of the Conference would be to bring together leading experts in the field of diabetes to discuss current issues relating to diabetes, take stock of the latest evidence-based best practices to address the epidemic and formulate practical measures for its management. It would also be a platform for building strategic alliance among health professionals from various parts of the world. The Conference would provide an opportunity for local health professionals to interact with experts, share experiences and learn about the best practices for the management of diabetes. *** Page 2 of 4 4. Cabinet has taken note of the findings of a technical report regarding the performance auditing undertaken to assess the effectiveness of coastal protection works at 15 sites across Mauritius. The Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change had been implementing a continuous coastal rehabilitation programme at priority sites over the past ten years in order to safeguard the coastal and marine assets. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the Drains Infrastructure Construction Ltd implementing eleven additional projects, as recommended by the Land Drainage Authority, across Mauritius. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note that the first Mauritius-China Free Trade Agreement Joint Commission Meeting would be held on 30 August 2023 in Mauritius. The Joint Commission aims at ensuring the effective operation and implementation of the Free Trade Agreement and other agreement or legal instrument concluded or intended to be concluded under the Agreement. The Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Mauritius, in collaboration with the Economic Development Board, would also organise the Mauritius-China FTA Cooperation Forum, on 31 August 2023, focusing on opportunities for business corporates. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note that a Workshop on Skill Development and an Award Ceremony would be organised by the Intelligent Minds Trust of India on 23 August 2023 in Mauritius. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that Youth Centres across the island would be renamed as Youth Hubs, in line with the announcement made in the Budget Speech 2021-2022, for the transformation of Youth Centres into modern Youth Hubs by the National Youth Council. The Youth Hubs would become community focal points, delivering and matching the youth to appropriate programmes, activities, counsellors, careers, and sports to further enhance their lives. The Youth Hubs would also engage youth on environmental issues. Renovation and upgrading works had been carried out in 21 Youth Centres across the island for the revamping of the Centres. The Youth Hub of Souillac would be officially inaugurated on 07 August 2023, following the completion of renovation works. With a view to mobilising and creating awareness among the population on the dangers and risks of drug use and promoting the prevention of drug abuse, a National Campaign Against Drugs would be officially launched on that day. The Campaign would be sustained and cover other regions across Mauritius in the coming months. *** Page 3 of 4 9. Cabinet has taken note that a National Vintage Photography Exhibition would be organised by the Ministry of Arts and Cultural Heritage in collaboration with the Ministry of Local Government and Disaster Risk Management and the National Art Gallery, from 18 to 25 August 2023 at the Caudan Arts Centre in the context of the celebration of the 55th Anniversary of the Independence of Mauritius. The Exhibition would comprise the 13 selected vintage photographs as well as a collection of 30 best vintage photographs from the Government Information Service collected over the years, some of which date back to the pre-independence period. Prizes would be awarded to the three best vintage photographs. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the participation of the Mauritian delegation in the 9th Edition of the “Jeux de la Francophonie” in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo in four sports disciplines, namely athletics/para athletics, judo, table tennis, wrestling as well as in cultural contests known as the “volet culturel”. As at date, Mauritius has won a total of eight medals including four gold, three silver and one bronze. The Mauritian participants are preparing actively to compete in athletics, judo, “lutte africaine” and “volet culturel” on 04 and 05 August 2023. A welcoming ceremony would take place at the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport on 07 August 2023 to greet the Mauritian delegation. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the SIDS Preparatory Meeting of the Atlantic, Indian Ocean and South China Sea (AIS) region hosted by Mauritius from 24 to 26 July 2023. During the meeting, the AIS countries reaffirmed their commitment to the SIDS Agenda, aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and the Paris Agreement. The meeting reviewed the region’s progress in the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway. A meeting of AIS Members and representatives of the donor/partner community was also organised in the sidelines of the Meeting. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Energy and Public Utilities in the G20 Energy Transition Ministerial Meeting on the theme ‘One Earth, One Family, One Future’ and the launching of the Global Biofuels Alliance in Goa, India. The aim of the G20 Energy Transition Ministerial Meeting was to share, collaborate and build on the sense of responsibility and solidarity amongst the G20 members in accelerating the clean, sustainable, just, affordable and inclusive energy transition. Such transition would act as a means of enabling secure, sustainable, equitable, shared and inclusive growth in line with the objectives of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to tackle climate change by strengthening the full and effective implementation of the Paris Agreement and its temperature goal. Page 4 of 4 The Minister also had the opportunity to explore and discuss possibilities of collaboration with the Minister of Energy from Denmark and Netherlands as well as representatives of international organisations. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change in the G20 Environment and Climate Sustainability Ministerial Meeting, in Chennai, India. Discussions during the Environment and Climate Sustainability Ministerial Meeting focused on the priority areas and critical challenges related to climate change and the environment, land and biodiversity, blue economy, water resource management and circular economy. The “Chennai High Level Principles for a Sustainable and Resilient Blue/Ocean-Based Economy” was also adopted as an Outcome Document for implementation by G20 members on a voluntary basis, according to national circumstances and priorities, and considering appropriate support for developing countries. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Labour, Human Resource Development and Training, Minister of Commerce and Consumer Protection in the G20 Labour and Employment Ministers Meeting in Indore, India. The G20 Outcome Document, the G20 Policy Priorities on strategies to address skill gaps globally, the G20 Policy Priorities on adequate and sustainable social protection and decent work for Gig and platform workers and G20 Policy Options for sustainable financing of social protection were adopted during the Ministerial Meeting. In the margins of the Meeting, the Minister had a meeting with the Union Minister for Labour and Employment and Environment, Forest and Climate Change of India. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change in the High Level Industrial Decarbonisation Ministerial Tour in the United Kingdom. He participated in the Minister to Minister Knowledge Sharing Infrastructure panel discussion and intervened in the first session of the Country Spotlight “Ecosystem Opportunities” panel discussion. The Minister also had bilateral meetings with the Trade Commissioner for Africa and key officials of the UK Department for Business and Trade to discuss potential avenues of collaboration for the decarbonisation of the energy and infrastructure sectors. *** 16. Cabinet has taken note of the constitution of the National Examinations Board, for a period of three years with Dr (Prof) Vassen Naeck as part time Chairperson. ******