Page 1 of 5 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING - FRIDAY 24 OCTOBER 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note that, on the invitation of the Government of the Republic of Seychelles, the Prime Minister will proceed, on Saturday 25 October 2025, to Seychelles to attend the Swearing in Ceremony of HE Dr Patrick Herminie, President-elect of the Republic of Seychelles, to be held on Sunday 26 October 2025. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Criminal Code (Amendment No. 2) Bill into the National Assembly. The United Kingdom and Mauritius have, in May 2025, signed a treaty relating to the Chagos Archipelago in which Mauritius is unequivocally recognised as being sovereign over the Chagos Archipelago. Accordingly, the object of the Bill is to repeal section 76B of the Criminal Code whereby the wrongful acts of misrepresenting the sovereignty of Mauritius by producing, distributing, supply or marketing any coin, stamp, official map or other official object or document have become inexistant. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the implementation of the following measures by the Ministry of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries with a view to mitigating the risk of introduction of the Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) in Mauritius from livestock imported from South Africa - (a) 100% Non-Structural Protein ELISA testing for the FMD virus; (b) 10% Solid Phase Competition ELISA testing for the FMD virus; (c) a quarantine period of 14 days in South Africa; and (d) a further quarantine period of 14 days upon arrival in Mauritius. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the recommendations contained in the Master Plan for the Recreation Zone on Île aux Bénitiers. The objective of the Masterplan is to promote socio-economic development through touristic activities on the islet while at the same time preserving its biodiversity. The Masterplan caters for amenities such as walkways and access routes, off-grid solar power supply, water tanks for rainwater harvesting, waste management facilities, interactive signage, CCTV surveillance and controlled entry through a ticketing and visitor management system. An embarkation point has been identified at La Gaulette for safe boarding and disembarkation of visitors. Page 2 of 5 The recommendations will be implemented in phases, with the collaboration and involvement of concerned Ministries, the Tourism Authority, the District Council of Black River, the Forestry Services, the National Parks and Conservation Service, law enforcement agencies, as well as through Public-Private Partnerships. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note that the newly constructed sports complex at Camp Motee Road, Triolet will be named as the “Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam Sports Complex” and will be inaugurated on Saturday 15 November 2025. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of representations received regarding the decision announced in the Budget Speech 2025/2026 for a new Grant-in-Aid Scheme for pre- primary schools and has agreed to the setting up of an Inter-Ministerial Committee under the chair of the Minister of Education and Human Resource which will comprise - (a) the Minister of National Infrastructure; (b) the Minister of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity; (c) the Minister of Labour and Industrial Relations; (d) the Minister of Gender Equality and Family Welfare; and (e) the Minister of Tertiary Education, Science and Research. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to the setting up of an Inter-Ministerial Committee to look into activities undertaken by hawkers during the festive season under the chair of the Minister of Housing and Lands and which will comprise - (a) the Minister of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change; (b) the Minister of Youth and Sports; (c) the Minister of Labour and Industrial Relations; (d) the Minister of Land Transport; (e) the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Protection; (f) the Minister of Industry, SME and Cooperatives; and (g) the Minister of Local Government. *** Page 3 of 5 8. Cabinet has agreed to the implementation of a Floating Solar Project at Tamarind Falls Reservoir, by the National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, India, pursuant to a Government-to-Government arrangement between Mauritius and India. The project involves the development of a 17.5MW Floating Solar Plant on the Tamarind Falls Reservoir and a 12MW Battery Energy Storage System (BESS). The project will utilise approximately 27% of the reservoir’s total area and will be connected to Henrietta Substation through an underground 22kV line. The Floating Solar plant is expected to generate approximately 36GWh of electricity annually as per the feasibility study. The BESS will provide firm power during evening peak for four hours at 10MW. *** 9. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius ratifying the Samoa Partnership Agreement, between the Members of the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States on the one hand and the European Union and its Member States on the other hand; and the inclusion of an interpretative declaration in the instrument of ratification. *** 10. Cabinet has agreed to the suspension of operations of the light rail vehicles along Line 2 (Rose Hill Central to Mahatma Gandhi, Réduit) on Sundays, as from 02 November 2025, as a cost-saving measure in the long term, in view of the challenging financial position of the Metro Express Limited and the markedly low ridership on Sundays. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note that a team of the Maharashtra Cyber Department will be in Mauritius from 30 October 2025 to 04 November 2025. During the visit, workshops and discussions will be centred around the following areas - (a) emerging threats in the field of cybersecurity and cybercrime; (b) appropriate Legal and Policy frameworks for combating cybercrime; (c) strengthening multistakeholder coordination and Public-Private Partnerships; (d) leveraging technology and reinforcing institutional capacity; and (e) effective awareness campaign and community engagement. *** Page 4 of 5 12. Cabinet has taken note that, following the intervention of the Prime Minister at the 45th SADC Ordinary Summit of Heads of State and Government in August 2025, an Extraordinary Meeting of the SADC Finance Sub-Committee was chaired by Mauritius virtually on 23 October 2025 to discuss amongst others, the outcome of the recomputation exercise of Member States’ assessed additional contribution towards the SADC Standby Force mission to the Democratic Republic of Congo. Following this exercise, the contribution for Mauritius was brought down from USD15,463,954 to USD7,663,993. An amount of USD596,596 will, therefore, be remitted to Mauritius. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the recent participation of the Minister of Gender Equality and Family Welfare in the Global Summit of Women held in Beijing. The Summit, which commemorated the 30th Anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women, provided a high-level platform to review progress achieved under the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and to strengthen global commitment to gender equality and women’s empowerment. Held under the theme “Carrying Forward the Spirit of the Beijing World Conference on Women and Promoting the New and Accelerated Process for Women’s All-Round Development”, the Summit reaffirmed that gender equality and women’s development are shared responsibilities of the international community and key drivers of sustainable development. In her address at the Plenary Session, the Minister reaffirmed Mauritius’ commitment to the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and to Sustainable Development Goal 5 on achieving gender equality and empowering all women and girls. She outlined progress made in gender parity in education, women’s leadership, gender-responsive budgeting, implementation of the National Gender Policy 2022- 2030, as well as initiatives supporting women entrepreneurs through training, digital literacy, and financial inclusion. She also highlighted national efforts to integrate gender perspectives in climate action and to address challenges such as the gender wage gap, underrepresentation of women in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) and decision-making positions. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Junior Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the 24th Summit of Heads of State and Government of the Common Market for the Eastern and Southern Africa held in Nairobi, Republic of Kenya. The theme of the Summit was “Leveraging digitalisation to deepen Regional Value Chains for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth”. Page 5 of 5 On the sidelines of the Summit, the Junior Minister held bilateral talks with various dignitaries, including the Minister of the Economy, Industry, Investments, Responsible for Economic Integration of Comoros; the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Tunisia; the Principal Secretary, Ministry of Foreign and Diaspora Affairs of Kenya; and the Manager Policy and Research, Shelter Afrique Development Bank, based in Nairobi. *****