Page 1 of 8 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 27 JUNE 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note of the composition of the Board of the National Agency for Drug Control, with Mr Samioullah Lauthan, MSK, as part-time Chairperson and the following members – (a) Mrs Bilkiss Rajahbalee-Cader, Permanent Secretary - representative of the Prime Minister’s Office (b) Mrs Asha Devi Sungkur Daby, Senior State Counsel - representative of the Attorney General’s Office (c) Mr Poojanraj Khurun, Conservator of Forests - representative of the Ministry of Agro- Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries (d) Dr Vedhiyen Moonsamy, Acting Director, Health & Wellness - representative of the Ministry of Education and Human Resource (e) Mrs Jeanne Lan Hing Po, Permanent Secretary - representative of the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change (f) Mr Jean Daniel Philippe Labonne, Permanent Secretary - representative of the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family Welfare (g) Dr Ashwamed Dinassing, Acting Director General Health Services - representative of the Ministry of Health and Wellness (h) Mr Khindev Gunputh, Director, National Occupational Safety and Health Department - representative of the Ministry of Labour and Industrial Relations (i) Miss Maheswaree Naraini Madhub, Senior Chief Executive - representative of the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity (j) Mrs Marie Dorine Patricia Achille-Feddoul, Principal Youth Officer - representative of the Ministry of Youth and Sports (k) Mr Mardaymootoo Rassen, Deputy Commissioner of Police - representative of the Commissioner of Police Page 2 of 8 (l) Mr Raj Rughoobeer, Deputy Commissioner of Prisons - representative of the Commissioner of Prisons (m) Mr Ajay Sowdagur, Secretary General - National Social Inclusion Foundation (n) Mr Aurelio Samoisy, Programme Manager - CRAC Anti-Drug Group, Rodrigues (o) Mr Faizal Elyhee, Pharmacist - Dr Idrice Goomany Treatment Centre (p) Ms Urvashi Dabysing, Director - Centre de Solidarité pour une Nouvelle Vie (CSNV) (q) Mr Marie Jacques Désiré Achille, Strategic Communication and Prevention Manager - Prévention Information Lutte contre le Sida (PILS) (r) Ms Meydesy Sophie, Director - Chrysalide (s) Ms Cécilia Samoisi-Duvergé, Administrator - Action for Heath Care and Prevention *** 2. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Prime Minister in the 3rd United Nations Ocean Conference (UNOC3) held in Nice, France on the theme “Accelerating action and mobilising all actors to conserve and sustainably use the ocean”. In his statement at the Plenary session of UNOC3, the Prime Minister urged for immediate and bolder actions towards the preservation of marine biodiversity. He made a strong plea for a special consideration for Small Island Developing States (SIDS). He called for enhanced cooperation and transfer of technology so that SIDS are not left behind. The Prime Minister made an appeal for embracing an ethical approach in addressing problems posed by climate change. He also announced the setting up of a Department of Ocean Studies at the University of Mauritius. The Prime Minister participated in the ‘Forum Mondial des îles’ where he presided a Panel entitled ‘Biodiversity and Natural Resources’ with discussions focusing on the ecosystem, genetic resources as well as on protected and invasive species. In his remarks, the Prime Minister highlighted the various measures taken by Mauritius for the protection of the marine ecosystem and appealed to the International Community for concerted actions, innovative solutions and resource mobilisation in favour of SIDS for the latter to effectively explore and sustainably exploit marine resources. The Prime Minister also attended the Summit on ‘L’Afrique pour l’Océan’ which was co-chaired by HE E. Macron, President of the Republic of France and Her Royal Highness, Princess Lalla Hasnaa of the Kingdom of Morocco. During the Summit, the Prime Minister highlighted the need for a differentiated approach taking into account the specificities of SIDS. He recalled that Mauritius intends to leverage on innovative practices stemming from scientific research for the sustainable and environmentally-friendly exploitation of marine resources. Page 3 of 8 In the margins of the Nice Conference, the Prime Minister had a bilateral meeting with President Macron at the Elysée Palace in Paris and they discussed several issues of bilateral and regional interests. The Prime Minister also held bilateral meetings with, inter alia, the Prime Minister of Portugal, the Deputy Prime Minister of Kyrgyzstan, the Minister of Communities of Cape Verde and the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the rebranding of the Mobile ID to a new brand name “KOREK!”. The logo, tagline and layout of “KOREK!” had been designed to be in line with the Government Programme 2025-2029 and the Digital Blueprint for Mauritius 2025-2029. “KOREK!” will ultimately be a super app which will encompass additional documents and e- services. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note that the Primary School Achievement Certificate (PSAC) Assessments 2025 will be held as follows - Grade 6 Pupils – Final Modular Assessments Date Subject Time Tuesday 02 September 2025 Science 0900 hours – 1000 hours Wednesday 03 September 2025 History & Geography 0900 hours – 1000 hours Grade 6 Pupils – Final PSAC Assessments Date Subject Time Tuesday 28 October 2025 French 0900 hours – 1045 hours Wednesday 29 October 2025 English 0900 hours – 1045 hours Thursday 30 October 2025 Asian Languages/Arabic/ Kreol Morisien/Kreol Rodrigues 0900 hours – 1045 hours Friday 31 October 2025 Mathematics 0900 hours – 1045 hours Page 4 of 8 Grade 5 Pupils and Private Candidates - PSAC Assessments 2025 Date Subject Time Tuesday 28 October 2025 French 0900 hours – 1045 hours Science 1200 hours – 1345 hours Wednesday 29 October 2025 English 0900 hours – 1045 hours Thursday 30 October 2025 Asian Languages/ Arabic/ Kreol Morisien/Kreol Rodrigues 0900 hours – 1045 hours History & Geography 1200 hours – 1345 hours Friday 31 October 2025 Mathematics 0900 hours – 1045 hours *** 5. Cabinet has taken note of the strategic initiative undertaken by the Ministry of Health and Wellness in collaboration with the World Health Organization, to develop a comprehensive National Medicine Policy for Mauritius. The policy will reinforce the commitment of Mauritius to Universal Health Coverage by ensuring equitable access to safe, effective, and affordable medicines for all. The National Medicine Policy will provide a strategic framework to - (a) ensure stable supply and affordability of essential medicines; (b) strengthen pharmaceutical regulation and governance; (c) promote rational use of medicines through treatment guidelines and training; (d) foster local pharmaceutical production and reduce dependency on imports; and (e) establish robust monitoring and evaluation mechanisms. A consultative workshop will be held in collaboration with the World Health Organization from 30 June to 02 July 2025 with the objectives of - (a) defining the vision, mission, and key components of the National Medicine Policy; Page 5 of 8 (b) prioritising legislative, regulatory and institutional reforms; (c) establishing a roadmap for stakeholder engagement and policy validation; and (d) designing implementation and monitoring frameworks. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the actions being undertaken by the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change in respect of the occurrence of macro-algal bloom primarily in the northern and eastern coasts of Mauritius. A Standing Committee, under the chair of the Deputy Prime Minister, was set up in March 2025 to examine affected regions, take cognisance of the contributing factors, assess the ongoing monitoring efforts by relevant stakeholders and make recommendations on the way forward to address the situation. The following initiatives will be undertaken - (a) an interim monitoring programme for the eastern coastal region for establishing a harmonised and coordinated monitoring system, which will encompass surface water, groundwater, rivers, seawater and lagoonal flushing dynamics; (b) the conduct of a capacity building exercise by the International Atomic Energy Agency for officers of the National Environment Laboratory, the Mauritius Oceanography Institute and the Albion Fisheries Research Centre on the use of a RAD-7 equipment for investigating the impact of groundwater on algal bloom; and (c) the enlistment of consultancy services for the – (i) development and implementation of an Integrated Algal Bloom Monitoring Framework for the different media, namely river water, seawater and groundwater, combined with flushing effect in the lagoon; (ii) analysis of environmental data, including trends and distribution; (iii) identification of the primary nutrient sources and environmental factors contributing to algal bloom; and (iv) development of a strategy for recommended actions to mitigate algal bloom. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the present situation with regard to coastal erosion across the island and the implementation of a concerted Coastal Rehabilitation Programme, focused on site-specific sustainable solutions by the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change. Rehabilitation works will be conducted at three critical sites, namely Trou aux Biches, Albion and Souillac and the following works will, inter alia, be conducted - Page 6 of 8 (a) rock revetment; (b) beach nourishment; (c) construction of boat ramp; (d) pedestrian walkway; and (e) landscaping works. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that the Southern African Development Community will organise a Regional Training Workshop on Gender Statistics from 28 July to 01 August 2025 in Mauritius. The workshop will be facilitated by Statistics Mauritius and will focus on gender statistics, with particular emphasis on statistics on the prevalence of Gender-Based Violence (GBV). The workshop will enable participants to – (a) discuss the definition of GBV prevalence data, ethical considerations and the various methods used for its measurement; (b) learn how to develop survey plans, and design tools and methods for conducting GBV prevalence surveys and collecting associated data; (c) enhance their practical skills for preparing reports and creating communication products that facilitate GBV data uptake and use; and (d) share their respective country experiences in the collection and analysis of quantitative and qualitative data on GBV as well as on the conduct of appropriate training programmes *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the participation of Mauritius in the 5th Edition of the “Best Tourism Villages” Initiative 2025. The initiative was introduced by UN Tourism in 2021 with a view to making tourism a positive force towards rural development and community wellbeing, in line with the Sustainable Development Goals. The villages of Bel Ombre, Souillac, Chamarel, Grand River South East and Trou aux Biches, known for their traditional lifestyle, natural, historical and cultural assets which include flora and fauna, scenic attractions, geological formations and handicraft, among others, have been nominated for participation in that initiative. The results of the 2025 Edition will be known in the fourth quarter of this year. *** Page 7 of 8 10. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries in the Second Brazil-Africa Dialogue on Food Security, Fight Against Hunger and Rural Development held in Brazil. The meeting served as a pivotal platform for strengthening South-South cooperation. The Dialogue was organised within the framework of the Global Alliance Against Hunger and Poverty which aims at accelerating progress toward Sustainable Development Goals 1 (No Poverty), 2 (Zero Hunger), and 10 (Reduced Inequalities). During his intervention, the Minister highlighted the unique challenges and specificities of Small Island Developing States using Mauritius as an example. He emphasised the country’s firm commitment to the principle of “producing what we eat and eating what we produce,” despite facing constraints such as microclimatic variability, acidic soils, and semi- arid conditions in certain areas. These challenges, while significant, could be effectively addressed through the implementation of rigorous, scientifically grounded agricultural policies. He stressed that with initiatives like the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme and enhanced cross-border cooperation, the continent could move towards food self-sufficiency. The Brazil-Africa Dialogue 2025 reaffirmed the growing momentum for South-South cooperation. Through an effective blend of technical field visits, policy dialogue, and strategic alliance-building, the Dialogue deepened mutual understanding and created pathways for collaborative innovation. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Health and Wellness in the 78th World Health Assembly meeting held in Geneva, under the theme “One World for Health”. During the Assembly, the Minister received the World Health Organization (WHO) Director General Special Recognition Award as part of World No- Tobacco Day 2025. The award was conferred to Mauritius as a Global Champion in the fight against tobacco. The WHO Pandemic Agreement which sets out the principles, approaches, and tools for better international coordination to make the world more equitable and safe from future pandemics through timely access to vaccines, therapeutics and diagnosis was adopted. During the Global Parliamentary Dialogue, the Minister elaborated on the active role played by the Parliamentarians in Mauritius in legislating and putting in place the required rules and regulations to make Mauritius a safe place for the population and foreigners to live in. He made two Statements on traditional medicine where he exemplified the actions taken by the Government to mainstream traditional medicine since 2004 as a complimentary and integrative medicine. Page 8 of 8 The Minister held bilateral discussions with, inter alia, the Director General of the WHO, the Executive Director WHO Health Emergencies Programme, the Vice-Minister of Ayush of India, the Regional Director of the Global Fund, the Policy and Advocacy Manager as well as the Policy and Advocacy Director of the NCD Alliance, the Vice-Minister, Department of Health and Family Welfare, India and the President of the Humanitarian for Empowerment Association. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Labour and Industrial Relations in the 113th Session of the International Labour Conference held in Geneva. The International Labour Conference is an annual event organised by the International Labour Organization, which brings together representatives of Governments, Workers’ and Employers’ organisations to, inter alia, discuss, establish and adopt international labour standards and also consider issues related to the application of International Labour Organization standards by Member States. The Minister addressed the plenary session of the Conference and emphasised the vision of Government to place jobs and workers’ rights at the heart of economic and financial policy making and the social, economic and legislative measures implemented to promote workers’ rights. In the margins of the Conference, the Minister attended the meeting of the Governing Council of the African Regional Labour Administration Centre (ARLAC). The Minister had a meeting with the Chairperson and the Executive Director of ARLAC where discussions focused on capacity building of officers. He also had a meeting with the Director General of the International Labour Organization. The Minister held bilateral meetings with Ministers responsible for labour and employment matters from India, Madagascar, Nepal, Singapore and Sierra Leone and their respective delegations to discuss avenues of cooperation in the areas of labour, employment and skill training. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the – (a) National Land Transport Authority Disciplinary Committee, with Mrs Aratee Prayag as part-time Chairperson; and (b) Board of the Early Childhood Care and Education Authority with Dr Saraswatee Rajiah, as part-time Chairperson. *********