Page 1 of 4 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 19 July 2024 1. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the State Lands (Amendment) Bill 2024 into the National Assembly. The object of the Bill is to amend the State Lands Act with a view to increasing the extent of portion of State land a person may buy where that person holds a building site lease over that portion of land and there is a residential unit on that portion of land. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note of the promulgation of the Banking (Processing and Licence Fees) (Amendment) Regulations 2024, which provide for an increase in the processing fee payable by a bank to the Bank of Mauritius when the former restructures itself. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note that the Waste Management and Resource Recovery Act 2023 would be proclaimed on 31 July 2024, except for section 53 of the Act which relates to the revocation of certain legislation. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change signing a Small-Scale Funding Agreement with the United Nations Environment Programme for the updating of the Marine Ecosystem Diagnostic Analyses for Mauritius. The Agreement provides for the completion of agreed pending activities under the initial Small-Scale Funding Agreement, namely the finalisation of the Marine Ecosystem Diagnostic Analyses Report as well as printing and circulating the revised National Oil Spill Contingency Plan. The Agreement would also comprise a new activity to conduct a public outreach which would include consultation, sensitisation and capacity building on oil spill preparedness and response for Rodrigues. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Health and Wellness renewing the Memorandum of Understanding with the Pakistan Institute of Ophthalmology, Al-Shifa Trust Eye Hospital Rawalpindi, Pakistan. The Memorandum of Understanding was first signed in July 2012 and renewed in July 2017. The Pakistani team had, to-date, effected 15 official visits to Mauritius and carried out more than 400 complex surgeries, free of charge. Page 2 of 4 The aim of the Memorandum of Understanding would be, inter alia, to further strengthen the cooperation in the field of Ophthalmology, refer Mauritian patients for overseas treatment at Al-Shifa Trust Eye Hospital and cater for capacity building of healthcare professionals. *** 6. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Public Service, Administrative and Institutional Reforms and the University of Technology, Mauritius (UTM) to establish a cooperative relationship to develop and foster academic linkages with focus on promoting digital resources, joint research initiatives, faculty exchanges, and other mutually beneficial activities. The Memorandum of Understanding would provide, inter alia, for the following areas of collaboration – (a) continuous professional development programmes for upgrading the skills of Public Officers and projects of mutual benefit to both institutions; (b) facilitate guest lectures from professionals in the Public Service to UTM and vice-versa; (c) implement the Work Placement Scheme in the Public Service for UTM students; (d) provision of training to Public Officers; (e) develop strategies to identify and groom future leaders in the Public Service (Succession Planning); and (f) promote a culture of continuous learning and development in the Public Service. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note that the Infrastructure and Projects Authority of the UK would conduct a mission to Mauritius from 22 to 26 July 2024. A Strategic Trade Partnership with the UK was signed in April 2023. Subsequently, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the Infrastructure and Projects Authority and the Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Development with a view to uplifting the quality, transparency and performance of infrastructure projects and programmes in Mauritius. During its mission to Mauritius, the Infrastructure and Projects Authority would provide training on essential aspects to be considered by public bodies when preparing their capital project proposals for subsequent appraisal and selection by the Public Investment Management Unit of the Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Development. A flagship Infrastructure Business Case course on the Five Case Model would be conducted for 250 participants. Page 3 of 4 *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that an eight-member delegation of the Ministry of Higher Education, Technology and Innovation of Namibia and the Namibia Training Authority would effect a benchmarking visit to Mauritius from 22 to 26 July 2024 to take cognisance of practices and measures with regard to collection, administration and management of Training Levy. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note that Mauritius would support the candidature of Mr Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC, former Minister of Foreign Affairs, to the post of Chairperson of the African Union Commission. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the nomination of HE Mr Edgard Razafindravahy to the post of Secretary-General of the Indian Ocean Commission for a period of four years. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note that the second Voluntary National Review Report of Mauritius was presented to the High-Level Political Forum of the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note that, as at 18 July 2024, there were 53 active cases of Dengue Fever in Mauritius, of which three persons had been hospitalised in both public and private hospitals. For Rodrigues, nine active cases of Dengue Fever had been recorded and three persons were hospitalised. Cabinet further noted that since 11 January 2024, 62 cases of Leptospirosis had been reported in Mauritius and three persons had been hospitalised as at 18 July 2024. The Ministry of Health and Wellness was pursuing the sensitisation campaigns on Dengue Fever and Leptospirosis in collaboration with relevant stakeholders. *** 13. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development in the 11th Edition of the Paris Forum in Paris. The Forum was organised by the Paris Club with the close collaboration of G20 Presidency on the theme “Successful Debt Treatments for Future Investment”. The Forum was centered on the following four main outlines – (a) Sovereign Debt Challenges in 2024; (b) Plenary Session on Securing a Successful Debt Treatment; (c) Comparability of Treatment through a Technical Workshop; and (d) Addis+10 and Sovereign Debt which was the closing Roundtable. Page 4 of 4 The Minister was one of the panellists of the closing roundtable which focused on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda 10 years-on. In the margins of the Forum, the Minister had meetings with, inter alia, various officials of the Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the key aspects and recommendations of the Hadj Mission 2024 Report, prepared by the Islamic Cultural Centre (ICC) Trust Fund. The Report provides a comprehensive overview of the efforts and arrangements undertaken by the Ministry of Arts and Cultural Heritage, the ICC and the Mauritian Embassy in Saudi Arabia to ensure a safe, fulfilling and well-organised pilgrimage for all Mauritian Hadjis. The Ministry of Arts and Cultural Heritage would hold working sessions with the ICC and relevant stakeholders to look into the proposed recommendations for Hadj 2025. Mauritius was nominated for the Labaytum Award for Excellence launched by the Saudi Ministry of Hadj and Umrah and was among the 27 countries (out of 85) which successfully completed the visas exercise within the deadline set by the Ministry of Hadj and Umrah. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note of the constitution of the Board of Mauritius Housing Holdings Ltd with Mr Anandsing Acharuz, Acting Financial Secretary, as part-time Chairperson. *** 16. Cabinet has taken note of the appointment of Dr Pierre Edgar Daniel Marie, Deputy Director of the Mauritius Oceanography Institute, to the post of Director of that Institute. ********