Page 1 of 6 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 11 APRIL 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the visit of the delegation led by the Deputy Prime Minister to Agalega on 03 and 04 April 2025. The objectives of the visit were to carry out a survey of all Government buildings, assess the status of the infrastructure following cyclone Chido and work on a maintenance plan. The delegation effected visits to the Control Tower and Airstrip, the Saint James Jetty, the accommodation and other equipment bought from AFCONS at La Fourche and the Health Centre in the North Island. The delegation also proceeded to the South Island on a boat and inspected the damaged multipurpose building at Ste Rita Village. The delegation had meetings with the Agalegans at Village Vingt Cinq Community Centre as well as Grande-Case, where the representatives of the Agalegan Community were invited to voice out their queries and proposals. The official visit ended with a statement to the press highlighting – (a) the extensive damage caused by cyclone Chido to the buildings, coconut plantation and infrastructure at the airstrip on Agalega; (b) an official report was awaited from the Ministry of National Infrastructure in order to come up with a reconstruction and maintenance plan for the buildings, plant and equipment on the island; (c) a new General Manager had been appointed at the Outer Islands Development Corporation; (d) a proper assessment of the needs for additional housing units would be effected by the Ministry of Housing and Lands in order to come up with an integrated housing project; and (e) the Outer Islands Development Corporation would purchase boats/barges to facilitate inter-island transfer. The Deputy Prime Minister would chair a coordination meeting in order to ensure follow up on the issues raised by the Agalegan community in the North and South Islands and on the implementation of the following – (a) a proper maintenance plan for all buildings, plant and equipment in consultation with the Ministry of National Infrastructure; (b) necessary amendments to be brought to the Agalega Island Council Act and the Outer Islands Development Corporation Act to review their powers, roles and responsibilities; and (c) a Masterplan to boost key sectors such as agriculture, livestock, coconut oil and fisheries. *** Page 2 of 6 2. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Supplementary Appropriation (2023- 2024) (No. 2) Bill into the National Assembly. The object of the Bill is to provide for the supplementary appropriation, by votes of expenditure, both recurrent and capital, in respect of services of Government for the financial year 2023-2024, in excess of the expenditure appropriated by the Appropriation (2023-2024) Act 2023 and the Supplementary Appropriation (2023-2024) Act 2024. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the Supplementary Appropriation (2024- 2025) Bill into the National Assembly. The object of the Bill is to provide for the supplementary appropriation, by votes of expenditure, both recurrent and capital, in respect of services of Government for the financial year 2024-2025, in excess of the expenditure appropriated by the Appropriation (2024-2025) Act 2024. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to instructions being conveyed to the Attorney-General’s Office for the drafting of the Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Public Service and Innovation Bill. The Bill would, inter alia, make provision for the following - (a) setting up of the Institute, together with the composition and powers of the Board; (b) the Academic Council and management structure of the Institute; (c) transfer of property, assets and liabilities of the former Civil Service College to the Institute; and (d) partnership and collaboration of the Institute with local and overseas institutions. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note that Mr Jean Todt, United Nations Secretary General’s Special Envoy for Road Safety, visited Mauritius on 08 and 09 April 2025 on the invitation of the Prime Minister. Mr Todt launched the UN Global Campaign for Road Safety in Mauritius. The Campaign consisted of the deployment of road safety messages on billboards in some 80 countries worldwide. Billboards to that effect had been placed at 12 locations around the island. During his visit, Mr Todt had a working session at the Ministry of Land Transport with the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit, the Police Department, the Ministry of Health and Wellness, the Ministry of Education and Human Resource, the Mauritius Fire Rescue Services and the National Road Safety Observatory, on road safety issues. He visited the Raoul Rivet Government School, where he had the opportunity to witness the practical sessions of the Road Safety Education being imparted to pupils in primary schools. Mr Todt made a series of recommendations to enhance road safety in Mauritius, which would be examined with stakeholders concerned. *** Page 3 of 6 6. Cabinet has agreed to the adoption and implementation of the - (a) Navigating Climate Action - A Comprehensive Guide to Institutional Arrangements for Climate Governance, Stakeholders Engagement and Identification of Mitigation Actions Report; (b) Gender Analysis and Gender Action Plan for Climate Change Mitigation; and (c) National Climate Change Mitigation Strategy and Action Plan Rodrigues Supplement 2022-2030. Mauritius secured a grant funding of USD1.6 million under the Global Environment Facility to implement the Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA) for Low Carbon Island Development Strategy for the Republic of Mauritius, with the United Nations Environment Programme as the implementing entity. The project identified the strategies, actions and governance structure required to support Mauritius in meeting its 40% greenhouse gas emission reduction target. The “Navigating Climate Action - A Comprehensive Guide to Institutional Arrangement for Climate Governance, Stakeholders Engagement and Identification of Mitigation Actions” report would provide guidance and support to national institutions with methods, approaches and descriptions of tasks required to fulfil their roles and responsibilities. The “Gender Analysis and Gender Action Plan for Climate Change Mitigation” contained a monitoring and evaluation framework with the identification of indicators and targets for measuring the implementation of each action, as well as responsible institutions and timeline for implementation. The “National Climate Change Mitigation Strategy and Action Plan Rodrigues Supplement 2022-2030”, which was developed in consultation with the Rodrigues Commission for Environment and stakeholders, includes two mitigation strategies and four mitigation actions for two sectors namely, energy industries and agriculture (livestock). An online MauNDC Registry Platform had also been set up under the NAMA project for monitoring and reporting on the implementation and achievement of the Nationally Determined Contributions. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the National Audit Office (Mauritius) and the Office of the Auditor General of Uganda. The objective of the Memorandum of Understanding would be to strengthen, promote and develop cooperation between the two institutions in the field of public sector auditing. The areas of cooperation under the Memorandum of Understanding include, inter alia, – (a) exchange of information, experiences and best practices on public auditing; (b) professional training for the improvement of professional standards of personnel; and (c) technical assistance to set up an IT Audit Unit. *** Page 4 of 6 8. Cabinet has agreed to the Polytechnics Mauritius Ltd signing a Memorandum of Understanding with the Kingston University Higher Education Corporation of the United Kingdom. The Memorandum of Understanding aimed at fostering collaboration for the development of the following activities of mutual interest in the areas of higher education and cultural cooperation - (a) the development of final year top-up programmes at undergraduate level to be awarded by the Kingston University Higher Education Corporation, in the fields of Computer Games Programming, Cybersecurity and Digital Forensics, Digital Media Technology, Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence and Robotic Engineering; (b) the exchange of academic and marketing materials, including publications; (c) academic exchanges of faculty and students, as well as study-abroad programmes and internships opportunities; (d) staff development programmes; (e) joint research projects and joint organisation of meetings, seminars and conferences on topics of mutual interest; (f) joint application for funding for collaborative projects; and (g) participation in cultural and social activities organised by either institution. *** 9. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the University of Mauritius and Absa Bank (Mauritius) Ltd with the objective of establishing a cooperative relationship between the two institutions. The Memorandum of Understanding aimed at developing and fostering academic linkages through, inter alia, the following – (a) the offering of a joint Masters Programme, under the Graduate Training Employment Scheme of the Human Resource Development Council; (b) the setting up of a state-of-the-art laboratory for technology-enabled teaching and learning, funded by Absa Bank (Mauritius) Ltd; (c) by facilitating placement of disabled University of Mauritius students at Absa Bank (Mauritius) Ltd through internships and temporary work placement; (d) the up-skilling of disabled University of Mauritius students by providing bespoke trainings, conferences and workshops; and (e) by engaging in joint academia-industry research and development activities. *** Page 5 of 6 10. Cabinet has taken note that the Minister of Information Technology, Communication and Innovation was chairing a Committee with representatives of the Prime Minister’s Office, Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation (MBC), Information and Communication Technologies Authority, Independent Broadcasting Authority and other stakeholders on the issue of licence fees charged by the MBC. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note of the organisation of a National Research Week from 14 to 18 April 2025 by the Ministry of Tertiary Education, Science and Research, in collaboration with the local tertiary education and research institutions with a view to highlighting research achievements and consolidating the partnership between the academia and industry. The theme of the National Research Week is “Impact Week 2025: Uniting Research, Industry, and Innovation.” The objectives of the National Research Week 2025 would be to – (a) promote interdisciplinary collaboration and foster partnerships among universities, research institutions, industries and government bodies; (b) showcase cutting-edge research and innovations by providing a platform for researchers and innovators to present their work to a broader audience, including potential investors and collaborators; (c) enhance public engagement and awareness on the importance of research and innovation; (d) drive economic growth and sustainability by linking research outcomes with industry needs to develop new products, services and technologies; and (e) facilitate policy development and integration. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of a workshop on the “Role of Women in Science, Technology and Innovation in the Global South” on 17 and 18 April 2025, organised by the Ministry of Tertiary Education, Science and Research in collaboration with the Centre for Science and Technology of the Non-Aligned and other Developing Countries. The workshop, with a high focus on gender equality and Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) had as objectives to - (a) encourage women scientists and technologists to address the socio-economic challenges through STI interventions; (b) identify and address the various challenges faced by women in their scientific career; (c) develop policy formulation for achieving gender equality in STI; and (d) facilitate international cooperation and networking among women on STI issues. *** Page 6 of 6 13. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised to mark Earth Day, which is celebrated annually on 22 April. The 55th anniversary of this global event would be dedicated to environmental protection on the theme “Our Power, Our Planet,” laying emphasis on the importance of transitioning to renewable energy sources as a key measure to combat climate change and promote sustainability. To commemorate Earth Day 2025, the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change would organise the following activities – (a) tree planting at Bras d’Eau National Park in collaboration with the Ministry of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries and the Ministry of Youth and Sports on 26 April 2025; (b) launching of a pilot paper recycling project in 10 primary and 10 secondary schools in the region of Plaines Wilhems during the second term in collaboration with the Ministry of Education and Human Resource and a local waste paper recycler; and (c) launching of a series of 10 factsheets and 10 video cartoons for schools on different environmental themes. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised to mark World Day for Safety and Health at Work on the theme “Revolutionizing Health and Safety: the role of AI and Digitalization at Work”, which would focus on the impacts of digitalisation and artificial intelligence (AI) on employees' safety and health. The Ministry of Public Service and Administrative Reforms would organise a workshop at the Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Public Service and Innovation to raise awareness, share knowledge and build capacity. The discussions would be geared towards exploring how AI and digital transformation could strengthen workplace safety, mitigate occupational risks, and shape the AI-driven future of work for a safer, more efficient and more resilient Public Service. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note of the - (a) appointment of Mrs Ah Foon Chui Yew Cheong, GOSK, former Judge of the Supreme Court as Chairperson of the Financial Services Review Panel; (b) reconstitution of the Board of the National Insurance Company Ltd and the Board of the National Insurance Company General Insurance Company Ltd, with Mr Santosh K. Gujadhur as part-time Chairperson; and (c) reconstitution of the Board of the Mauritius Society of Authors, with Mr Richard Hein as part-time Chairperson. ******