Page 1 of 2 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 07 MARCH 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note of the activities and arrangements being made for the National Day Celebrations 2025 on the theme “As One People As One Nation”. HE Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic of India, would be on a State Visit to Mauritius on 11 and 12 March 2025, on the occasion of the National Day Celebrations 2025. The Prime Minister of the Republic of India would attend several functions during his visit, including, inter alia, a Wreath Laying Ceremony and Tree Planting at Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam Botanic Garden, a State Banquet, a Delegation Level Meeting, exchange of bilateral agreements and inauguration ceremonies of bilateral projects. HE Shri Narendra Modi would be the Chief Guest at the Flag Raising Ceremony to be held at noon at Champ de Mars, Port Louis on 12 March 2025. The programme of the Official Ceremony would be followed by a cultural programme by Mauritian artists. Special transport facilities would be provided to the public as follows – (a) bus and metro fares at half rate two hours before and two hours after the celebration to all persons travelling to and from Champ de Mars; and (b) free transportation during the above-mentioned time and route for children aged less than 13 years. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Department for Continental Shelf, Maritime Zones Administration and Exploration and the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services. The aim of the Memorandum of Understanding would be to create a framework of collaboration with a view to enhancing cooperation for the exchange of information and expertise focused on the technology and standards used in data repositories and visualisation centres. The Memorandum of Understanding would provide, inter alia, for – (a) access to up-to-date technologies that facilitate the availability of and access to marine geospatial data, including the use of data and/or metadata management tools; (b) collaboration on best practices in geospatial data management, including the sharing of standards to ensure data interoperability with local, regional and international geospatial platforms; (c) capacity building in ocean services, including data management, remote sensing, ocean modelling and hydrodynamic modelling of the coastal and marine environment; Page 2 of 2 (d) collaboration in the field of ocean observations; and (e) distribution and sharing of information regarding the coastal and marine environment. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the holding of the 8th Eastern Africa Regional Technical Advisory Committee (ReSCO) on 10 and 11 April 2025 in Mauritius. The events would be organised by the Ministry of Health and Wellness in collaboration with the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The objective of the Regional Technical Advisory Committee meeting would be to review Africa CDC’s Strategic Implementation Progress, discuss current and emerging public health threats such as Mpox, Marburg and Cholera, enhance Health Security and Pandemic Preparedness and formulate recommendations for ReSCO. The mandate of the Regional Ministerial Steering Committee Meeting would be to provide High-Level Policy Oversight, strengthen Regional Emergency Coordination and elect new Regional Ministerial Steering Committee leadership. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note that a team from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) would visit Mauritius from 10 to 21 March 2025 to conduct a survey to assess the readiness of the National Productivity and Competitiveness Council (NPCC) for a project to disseminate the Kaizen Approach in Mauritius and neighboring countries. The project would enhance the NPCC’s capacity to become a Centre of Excellence for Kaizen dissemination, promote regional integration, generate revenue through consultancy services, and support the Government’s objective of boosting productivity and competitiveness. The initiative aligns with recommendations from “Les Assises de L’Industrie” held in February 2025. The visit would culminate in the signing of an agreement between JICA and NPCC, covering key technical aspects such as consultant recruitment, training programs, project selection and a framework for Kaizen dissemination to neighbouring countries. ******