Page 1 of 2 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 27 DECEMBER 2024 1. Cabinet has taken note, with sadness, of the demise of Dr Manmohan Singh, former Prime Minister of the Republic of India. On behalf of Government and the people of the Republic of Mauritius, a message of condolence has been sent to the bereaved family. Hon D. Ramful, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade would represent Mauritius at the State Funeral. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed that, henceforth, subscribers of SIM cards would no longer be required to register or re-register their SIM cards. The Information and Communication Technologies (Registration of SIM) (Revocation) Regulations 2024 were being promulgated to provide for – (a) the revocation of the Information and Communication Technologies (Registration of SIM) Regulations 2023; and (b) mobile operators to delete the database of photographs of all persons who had already registered their SIM Cards. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the extension of the moratorium period for the banning of the following non-biodegradable single use products from 15 January 2025 to 14 January 2026 – (a) plastic bowls and plastic cups used solely for the packaging of food products such as dairy products; and (b) plastic trays used solely for “Modified Atmosphere Packaging” of food such as fresh meat and pre-cooked/cooked food products, such as meat, burgers, seafood and cheese. The Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change held consultations with Business Mauritius, the Mauritius Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Association of Mauritian Manufacturers to take stock of progress achieved by the local food industry towards the shift to alternatives to plastic packaging. A Multi-Stakeholder Technical Committee would be set up to re-assess the situation and come up with appropriate measures to ensure the enforcement of the Regulations. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note that the Freeport (Amendment) Regulations 2024 would be promulgated to provide for the extension from 31 December 2024 to 31 December 2025, of the prescribed period for the provision of warehousing facilities by a Private Freeport Developer in a Freeport Zone. *** Page 2 of 2 5. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the board of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation with Mr Amaresh Singh Ramlugan, as part-time Chairperson and the following members – (a) Mrs Marie Joëlle Sandrine Valère-Bolli, Acting Senior Chief Executive, Prime Minister’s Office; (b) Director, Government Information Service; (c) Mrs Rajcoomaree Issur; (d) Mrs Anne Robert; (e) Mr Vishnou Gondeea; and (f) Dr Roukaiya Kasenally. ******