Page 1 of 4 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 03 NOVEMBER 2023 1. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Protocol amending the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTAA) between the Government of the Republic of Mauritius and the Government of Jersey. The DTAA was signed on 03 March 2017 and came into force on 19 December 2018. The objective of the Protocol was to amend the DTAA so that it would comply with the Base Erosion and Profit Shifting minimum standards of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Mauritius Oceanography Institute and RPS Australia West Pty Ltd on “Building in-country forecasting capability for response to marine oil spills and marine search and rescue operations” to enhance the preparedness and response capability of the Republic of Mauritius to effectively respond to spills of oil into marine waters and marine search and rescue operations. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note of the situational analysis of the tourism sector two years after the complete reopening of the borders to tourism on 01 October 2021. The cumulative number of tourists visiting Mauritius since 01 October 2021 has crossed the threshold of two million during the month of September 2023, reaching 2,068,736 tourists on 30 September 2023. Tourist arrivals in Mauritius recovered by 92.6 percent for the period January to September 2023. The performance of the tourism sector since the reopening of the borders indicates that Mauritius is on the right track to reaching pre-pandemic numbers, subject to availability of sufficient air connectivity. The Mauritius Tourism Promotion Authority is implementing a market diversification strategy mainly in Asia, Eastern Europe, Middle East and Africa. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the holding of the 14th World Tamil Teachers’ Conference from 08 to 10 December 2023 in Mauritius. The Conference is being organised by the International Association for Tamil Teaching and Learning, in collaboration with the Primary School Tamil Teachers’ Union, the Mahatma Gandhi Institute and the Ministry of Education, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology. The Conference would have as overriding theme “Highlighting the Spoken Tamil in Teaching and Learning”. Some 800 participants, including some 250 foreign delegates from Australia, Canada, Europe, India, Madagascar, Malaysia, Myanmar, Reunion, Singapore, South Africa, United Kingdom and USA were expected to participate in the Conference. *** Page 2 of 4 5. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity would organise a national event to mark the International Day of Persons with Disabilities 2023 on Sunday 03 December 2023 at the Trianon Convention Centre. The International Day of Persons with Disabilities is celebrated on 03 December every year. The event aims to mobilise support for critical issues relating to the inclusion of persons with disabilities and raising awareness on the benefits of an inclusive and accessible society for all. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised in the context of Human Rights Day 2023, which is celebrated around the world on 10 December every year. The theme chosen by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is “Dignity, Freedom and Justice for All”, in line with the fundamental rights that are to be universally protected as per the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Human Rights Division of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade would organise, inter alia, the following activities – (a) launching of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Kreol Morisien; (b) inauguration of an online exhibition of pictures drawn by children portraying their understanding of human rights; and (c) holding of a high level workshop in collaboration with the Institute of Judicial and Legal Studies for persons of the legal profession. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Youth Empowerment, Sports and Recreation in collaboration with the Mauritius Sports Council, the Mauritius Recreation Council, and the National Youth Council would organise activities during the forthcoming summer school holidays, from 06 November 2023 to 07 December 2023. The following main activities would be organised - (a) an Eco Tour comprising hiking activities at two popular hiking sites, namely Le Souffleur and Le Pétrin on 16 November 2023; (b) the PlayStation 5 competition namely a FIFA 2024 PlayStation competition region-wise from 06 to 17 November 2023. The regional competition would culminate in a grand finale scheduled on 02 December 2023 at the Bo’Valon Mall; (c) recreation activities including fun games, quad biking, kayaking, cycling, and open air badminton on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays from 06 November to 07 December 2023, at the Anse La Raie Regional Outdoor Education and Recreation Centre and at Pointe Jérôme National Outdoor Education and Recreation Centre; Page 3 of 4 (d) fun games such as ‘Jeux d’Antan’, movie projections, and sports activities in five Youth Hubs, namely at Residence La Cure, Dockers, Helvetia, Mahebourg, and Souillac; (e) the ‘Nager C’est Vital’ programme be held in various swimming pools; and (f) the ‘Summer Holiday Sports Camp’ which includes the ‘Vulnerable Youth Programme’ would enable young people, including those coming from under- privileged areas, to have an opportunity to be initiated to different sports activities, including swimming. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Youth Empowerment, Sports and Recreation in collaboration with the Mauritius Sports Council, the National Youth Council, the Mauritius Recreation Council, the Mauritius Multisport Infrastructure Limited and the Commission Nationale du Sport Féminin would organise the fourth edition of the 12-Hour National Relay Walk, Jog and Run for Fun, also known as the 12-Hour Move 4 Fun, at the Côte d’Or National Sports Complex on Sunday 26 November 2023 from 0600 hours to 1800 hours The objective of the walk would be to sensitise the population to engage in regular physical activity as part of a healthy lifestyle. Side demonstration activities including boxing, karate, tae kwon do and gymnastics, among others, would be held in the margins of the event. *** 9. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Blue Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries and Shipping authorising the importation of 400 tons of “Capitaine” fish (Lethrinus sp.) for the period 01 December to 15 January 2024 in view of the end-of-year festive season. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development in the 2023 Annual Meetings of the World Bank Group (WBG) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in Marrakech, Morocco. The Annual Meetings featured several events focusing on key priority topics of the WBG and IMF under the theme of Global Action, Global Impact. It provided an opportunity for Ministerial delegations to discuss and exchange views with the WBG and IMF staff and other stakeholders. The Minister had bilateral meetings with the Director of the African Department of the IMF and the Executive Directors of the World Bank and IMF for Constituency No. 2 for Africa. He participated in the African Caucus Governors meeting chaired by the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Finance of the Republic of Cape Verde and in a meeting on the Poverty Reduction Growth Trust with the IMF Managing Director. Page 4 of 4 The Minister also participated in the signing of a Loan Agreement with the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa for the Rivière des Anguilles Dam project and had preliminary discussions with the Minister of Finance of Curaçao on possible collaboration for entering into a tax treaty. *** 11. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Protection in the 8th World Investment Forum organised by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. The Forum aimed at facilitating dialogue and action on the world's current and emerging investment-development challenges through multiple dialogue sessions with distinguished speakers. The Minister participated in the different sessions held during the Forum and intervened in the High-level Summit Roundtable on Investment Guarantees in Small Island Developing States and the Enterprise Ministerial Roundtable. In the margins of the Forum, she had several bilateral meetings with, inter alia, the Minister of State for Foreign Trade of the United Arab Emirates, the Secretary General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the Secretary General of the Commonwealth Secretariat. ******