Page 1 of 6 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 04 JULY 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note of the recommendations of the two Committees set up to look into possible support to be provided to those persons who will not be eligible for the Basic Retirement Pension (BRP) and who rely mainly or solely on the BRP, and has agreed to the following - (a) persons who reach the age of 60 years as from 01 September 2025 and who will become ineligible for the BRP will benefit from a monthly Income Support of Rs10,000, including an end-of-year bonus, subject to an income criterion; (b) persons will be eligible for the Income Support provided that the monthly income does not exceed Rs20,000 for a couple and Rs10,000 for a single person household; (c) for a single person, the monthly income will include emoluments, income from business or profession, and contributory retirement benefits, but will exclude the lump sum payable on retirement and other benefits (including the Invalidity Allowance) provided by the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity; (d) for a married person, the monthly income will include emoluments, income from business or profession, and contributory retirement benefits but exclude the lump sum payable on retirement and other benefits (including the Invalidity Allowance) provided by the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity as well as the basic invalidity pension, the Income Support in lieu of the BRP or the BRP being drawn by the spouse; (e) beneficiaries of the Basic Invalidity Pension, the Basic Widow’s Pension and the Invalidity Allowance, who turn 60 years, will continue to receive their respective pensions until they qualify for the BRP. Those benefitting from the Basic Invalidity Pension and the Basic Widow’s Pension will not be concerned by the Income Support; (f) beneficiaries will include housewives, retirees, employed and self-employed that meet the criteria; and (g) the period during which the person reaching the age of 60 years on 01 September will be paid the Income Support is as follows –  one year for those reaching age of 60 years on 01 September 2025 up to 31 August 2026; Page 2 of 6  two years for those reaching age of 60 years on 01 September 2026 up to 31 August 2027;  three years for those reaching age of 60 years on 01 September 2027 up to 31 August 2028;  four years for those reaching age of 60 years on 01 September 2028 up to 31 August 2029;  five years for those reaching age of 60 years on 01 September 2029 up to 31 August 2030; and  five years for those reaching age of 60 years on 01 September 2030 up to 31 August 2031. The Mauritius Revenue Authority (MRA) will be responsible for putting in place and administering an IT system for the payment of the Income Support. Beneficiaries will have to submit a one-time application for the Income Support to the MRA unless there is a change in circumstances. The Income Support will be credited directly to the bank account of the beneficiaries on the first working day of every month. Around Rs8.7 billion will be disbursed in respect of income support to eligible beneficiaries over a period of five years. The Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity will carry out a holistic review of the invalidity pension system and make appropriate recommendations for reform. A Commission of Experts will be set up to look into the reform of the three pillars of the pension system, as well as the revamping of the National Pension Fund to replace the Contribution Sociale Généralisée. The Terms of Reference of the Commission are being worked out. The Chairperson and members of the Commission will be appointed soon. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note that Mauritius has been elected as member of the Executive Council of the UNESCO Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission for the term 2025-2027. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of the finals of the Inter-College Sports Competition, commonly known as the Jeux Inter-Collèges, from 14 to 18 July 2025. The competition will serve as a platform for discovering young talents, fostering camaraderie and instilling a deep sense of pride and belonging among our youth. The competition will comprise five sports disciplines, namely athletics, badminton, football, table tennis and volleyball. Page 3 of 6 2,568 students, including 40 from Rodrigues, qualified for the national competition. The finals for football and athletics will take place at the Côte d’Or National Sports Complex whereas those for badminton will be held at the National Badminton Centre in Rose Hill. The finals of the table tennis competition are scheduled at the National Table Tennis Centre in Beau-Bassin, and volleyball at the Pandit Sahadeo Gymnasium in Vacoas. An overall champion of the Jeux Inter- Collèges will be declared based on the cumulative points obtained by each college in the five sports disciplines during the finals. The winners will be rewarded with medals and trophies. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note of the continued collaboration of the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family Welfare with the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) for the period 2024-2028, through the implementation of the Annual Workplan for the year 2025, in line with the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, signed between the United Nations and the Republic of Mauritius. Following the signature of an Implementing Partner Agreement, funds to the tune of Rs303,000 will be disbursed by the UNFPA for the year 2025 and the following projects will be implemented – (a) elaboration of a new Domestic Abuse Bill for Mauritius; (b) development of an Executive Package on Gender-Based Violence Case Management and Referral Pathways; and (c) training of Trainers Programme on Inter-Agency Response to Gender-Based Violence, facilitated by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Information Technology, Communication and Innovation sending to the International Telecommunication Union Radiocommunication Bureau a Letter of Agreement on behalf of the Republic of Mauritius for Angola to act as the International Telecommunication Union Notifying Administration for the SADC Shared Satellite Network. *** 6. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries and the SBM Bank (Mauritius) Ltd (SBM) to establish a framework of cooperation between the Forestry Service of the Ministry of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries and the SBM. The SBM will collaborate with the Forestry Service on the sustainable management of forests with a view to contributing to the economic development of the country in accordance with the UN Sustainable Development Goals. The Memorandum of Understanding will cover, inter alia, the following areas of strategic collaboration – Page 4 of 6 (a) increase in the area of protected, restored or sustainably managed forests; (b) reduction of the annual rate of deforestation of natural forests; (c) dissemination of information and sharing of experiences in the field of sustainable forest management and land use in the dry tropical forests; (d) improving the management, protection, rational use and diversification of forest resources; (e) protection of Environmentally Sensitive Areas in forests to ensure a continuous supply of clean and fresh water for domestic and other purposes; (f) preservation of our rich heritage of native species of plants, birds and animals; and (g) promotion of the overall welfare and wellbeing of the population by improving access and facilities in our forests for leisure and recreation. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the signing of an agreement between the University of Mauritius and the University of Waterloo, Canada under which an amount of around Rs6 million will be allocated for a research project titled “Resilience to Climate Vulnerability and Environmental Risk” (RECOVER). The RECOVER project is an innovative, timely and needs-driven North-South initiative aimed at addressing climate change adaptation through a multi-risk and multi-sector approach. Pilot projects will be conducted in three countries, namely Fiji, Maldives and Mauritius, represented respectively by the University of Fiji, the Maldives National University and the University of Mauritius. The objectives of the project will be met through multisectoral partnerships and combined scientific excellence of multiple disciplines that will engage stakeholders in co-creating knowledge and developing place-based solutions. The collaborative approach will enhance transformative capacity in small islands by promoting inclusive development, building partnerships and creating communities of practice. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note of the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the National Productivity and Competitiveness Council (NPCC) and the Japan Productivity Center, for capacity-building, networking and promoting Kaizen in neighbouring countries in Africa. The objective of the Memorandum of Understanding, which is being signed in the context of the African Kaizen Initiative, is to establish the terms and conditions for the execution of a project submitted by the NPCC in January 2025 to assist enterprises operating in the Agro- processing and Tourism sectors of Madagascar. The project will entail, inter alia, - (a) the holding of a public webinar introducing the concept of Kaizen to a Malagasy audience; Page 5 of 6 (b) a call for interest of Malagasy enterprises that are interested in the project; (c) the conduct of a training for the interested enterprises on lean management tools and techniques; (d) a diagnosis of the enterprises’ readiness to implement Kaizen lean management techniques; (e) the implementation of the Kaizen project in the selected enterprises which is expected to be done virtually over a period of two months; and (f) the organisation of a dissemination workshop to share the outcome of the project. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Industry, SME and Cooperatives in the 17th United States-Africa Business Summit held in Luanda, Angola, which was organised by the Corporate Council of Africa (CCA). The Minister participated in the Roundtable on Pathways to Prosperity: A shared vision for Trade by Investment. In his address, the Minister called for an enhanced partnership between Africa and the United States (US), through the Africa Continental Free Trade Area, which can unlock the door for US businessmen to a unified market of over 1.4 billion people. He also underscored the crucial role played by Small and Medium Enterprises, which also includes a women empowerment dimension given the active participation of African women in businesses, in bolstering trade ties between Africa and US. The Minister had a bilateral meeting with the Chief Executive Officer of the CCA and Ambassador Troy Fitrell, Deputy Head of the US delegation to the Business Summit. The Minister also participated in the Closing Plenary on the Future of US-Africa Partnership. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Industry, SME and Cooperatives in the Commonwealth Trade Ministers Meeting (CTMM) which was held in Namibia. A Commonwealth Business Summit was also organised in the margins of the CTMM and aimed at enhancing public-private sector dialogue and partnerships and unlock untapped opportunities. The Minister was invited to speak on the plenary panel of the Business Summit entitled “Navigating Global Trade Uncertainty - The Commonwealth Advantage”. The CTMM considered the recommendations made by Senior Trade Officials and examined the 2025 Commonwealth Trade Ministers Meeting Outcome Statement as well as the Commonwealth Statement on the Multilateral Trading System. The Minister also had bilateral meetings with the Secretary General of the Commonwealth, the Assistant Minister for Immigration and Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Australia as well as the Minister of State for Trade and Industry and National Development of Singapore, and Board member of the Monetary Authority of Singapore. *** Page 6 of 6 11. Cabinet has taken note that the Board of the Mauritius Society of Authors will proceed with the reinstatement of Mr Antoine Eugène Gérard Louise to the post of Director of the Mauritius Society of Authors. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the – (a) Rose Belle Sugar Estate Board, with Mr Rajendra Kumar Ujoodha, GOSK as part- time Chairperson; (b) Council of Registered Professional Engineers of Mauritius; and (c) Mauritius Research and Innovation Council with, Dr Khemduth Singh Angateeah, as part-time Chairperson. ******