Page 1 of 4 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 29 JULY 2022 1. Cabinet has taken note that the Fisheries and Marine Resources (Marine Protected Areas) (Amendment) Regulations 2022 would be promulgated with a view to allowing the exemption, waiving or refund of the Interference Permit and any other fee payable under the Regulations by any Ministry or statutory body as most requests relate to projects for the protection of the environment. Interference Permit fees are payable for the installation of permanent or temporary structures in Marine Protected Areas. --- 2. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Republic of Mauritius and the Republic of Mozambique on arts and cultural heritage for the period 2022-2023. The objective of the Memorandum of Understanding is to strengthen mutual understanding and friendship between both countries in the fields of arts and cultural heritage. The main areas of cooperation of the Memorandum of Understanding are, inter alia, to - (a) encourage exchange visits by cultural and artistic groups to participate in international cultural and artistic activities held in their respective countries; (b) encourage exchange on subjects related to museums, archives, libraries and art galleries in both countries; and (c) exchange documents and conduct research in the fields of slavery and heritage. --- 3. Cabinet has taken note of the signature of a Project Cooperation Agreement Amendment No. 3 between the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in respect of the Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA) for Low Carbon Island Development Strategy project, reflecting an extension of the project to 31 January 2024 and implementation of new activities. The objective of the project is to ensure a low carbon path for Mauritius and which would culminate into the formulation of a first National Climate Change Mitigation Strategy and Action Plan in line with the Climate Change Act. The NAMA project would thus play a pivotal role in the conduct of detailed assessments and setting up of mitigation targets for sectors such as energy, transport, industrial processes and product use, agriculture, waste management (solid and liquid) and forestry. --- Page 2 of 4 4. Cabinet has taken note of the main outcome of the Sixth Compliance Committee meeting and the Ninth Meeting of Parties of the Southern Indian Ocean Fisheries Agreement (SIOFA) that were held in Reunion Island recently. The SIOFA is a multilateral agreement adopted in July 2006 by the Food and Agriculture Organization for the conservation and sustainable use of fishery resources in the waters beyond national jurisdiction in the Southern Indian Ocean region. The Compliance Committee is a subsidiary body of the Meeting of Parties which advises it on compliance matters. Mauritius has been nominated as the official chair of the Meeting of Parties as from 04 July 2022. The next Meeting of Parties and the Compliance Committee would be held in Mauritius in May 2023. --- 5. Cabinet has agreed to the Office of Public Sector Governance conducting seven reviews in Ministries and Government Departments for the period August 2022 to June 2023 on the basis of the findings and shortcomings noted in the Report of the Director of Audit on the Accounts of Government for Financial Year 2020/2021. --- 6. Cabinet has agreed to the holding of the International Conference on Archipelagic Memory: Intersecting Geographies, Histories and Disciplines, to be organised by the University of Mauritius, in collaboration with King’s College of London and the University of Witwatersrand, South Africa from 2 to 4 August 2022. The Conference would aim, inter alia, at – (a) exploring the connected histories across seas and oceans, with a view to prompting theoretical dialogue and thinking on cultural production; (b) considering future trajectories in individual, collective, as well as national identity in archipelagic spaces and cultures; and (c) exploring connected histories and developing an analytical framework to allow for reflection linked to narratives of historical, national and cultural development. Around 75 participants, including 54 international academics, students, organisers and volunteers would attend the Conference. --- 7. Cabinet has taken note that Moody’s Investors Service has revised Mauritius’ sovereign credit to Baa3. Mauritius remains in the investment grade. Moody’s has also changed the outlook from Negative to Stable on the basis that the fiscal and debt metrics will further improve. --- Page 3 of 4 8. Cabinet has taken note that an e-platform known as the Project Management Information System (PROMIS) has been set up by the Ministry of National Infrastructure and Community Development for the effective monitoring of all capital building projects. PROMIS is already operational. --- 9. Cabinet has taken note that the Ministry of Health and Wellness, in collaboration with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) would hold a “Regional Training Course to Train the Trainers in Radiation Safety Culture" from 17 to 21 October 2022 in Mauritius. The objective of the event is to strengthen capacity for training of trainers in radiation safety culture. Regional experts would provide training at country level by utilising the traits handbook developed by the IAEA. Some 30 participants from IAEA Member States are expected to participate in the event as well as five local participants in the field of Nuclear Medicine and Radiopharmacy. --- 10. Cabinet has taken note of the situation of the COVID-19 pandemic prevailing across the world. Some 578.8 million cases have been reported globally, of which 548.8 million persons have been successfully treated. With regard to Mauritius, as at 27 July 2022, there were 385 active cases of COVID-19, out of which 46 were admitted at the New ENT Hospital. Over the period 21 to 27 July 2022, four deaths were attributed to COVID-19. Cabinet has also taken note that the National Vaccination Committee has recommended the administration of the second booster dose of COVID-19 vaccine for persons aged 18 years and above. Cabinet has further taken note of the COVID-19 cases detected in Agalega and the Preparedness Plan being implemented by the Ministry of Health and Wellness. --- 11. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent official visit of the Minister of Energy and Public Utilities to Rodrigues. The Minister, inter alia, co-chaired with the Chief Commissioner, a High-Level Working Session in Rodrigues on the water sector to take stock of the actual water situation in Rodrigues and, based on previous experience, chart out appropriate actions that could be implemented in the short, medium and long term with a view to averting the anticipated water crisis. Various proposals and recommendations were made at the High Level Meeting to address the water situation in the immediate term. The Rodrigues Regional Assembly (RRA) launched, on 23 July 2022, the Rodrigues Public Utilities Corporation, which would be the executive arm of the RRA, primarily in the field of water production. During his visit, the Minister visited one Power station and four CEB Renewable Energy projects on the island. --- Page 4 of 4 12. Cabinet has taken note that the elected members on the Board of the Mauritius Society of Authors (MASA) following the election held on 10 July 2022, are – (a) two members from the Category of Music Author, Composer and Performer – Mr Steve Kersley Clarence Henri Augustin and Mr Gunesshun Hurry; (b) two members from the category of Audio-visual/Theatrical – Mr Darmalingum Mootien and Mr Jean Alexandre Michaël Martin; (c) one member from the category of Literary Author – Mr Sedley Richard Assonne; (d) one member from the category of Publisher – Mr Jean Denis Jimmy Veerapin; and (e) one member from the category of Other Works – Mr Jonathan Christophe Bécherel. ----