Page 1 of 4 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – 26 JULY 2024 1. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius joining the European Union Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear Centres of Excellence, a globally funded initiative, implemented by the European Union to promote peace, stability and conflict prevention. Mauritius would benefit from the assistance and support provided by the European Union under the programme for the upgrading of the national nuclear security regime and for further development of the national capabilities for effective preparedness and response to radiological incidents as well as for chemical and biological risk mitigation. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius continuing its role as Champion of the Coral Reef Protection and Restoration Action Group for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting cycle. Being part of the Coral Action Group allows Mauritius to – (a) showcase commitment to environmental stewardship and serve as a leader in the global effort to protect and restore coral reefs, contributing to broader international conservation efforts; (b) collaborate with other nations to protect and conserve the fragile ecosystems; (c) enhance resilience to these challenges through shared knowledge, research, and best practices; (d) acquire access to resources, expertise, and funding opportunities that could support efforts to conserve and restore coral reefs; and (e) demonstrate commitment to achieving the SDGs, particularly Goal 14 (Life Below Water), which emphasises the importance of conserving marine ecosystems. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note that the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre in collaboration with the Japan International Corporation Agency would conduct the “Sustainable Development Goals Business Verification Survey with the Private Sector for Improving Multi-Hazard Decision Making by using Disaster Information Service in Mauritius” project. The Rescuenow technology is utilised in Japan to facilitate the rapid collection and consolidation of information, enabling timely sharing of information to various organisations engaged in disaster response operations. *** Page 2 of 4 4. Cabinet has taken note of the status of the Continuum of Road Safety Education project in Mauritius, which was being implemented in line with the National Road Safety Strategy 2016-2025 by the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit, in collaboration with the Ministry of Education, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology, the Mauritius Institute of Education, the Mauritius Film Development Corporation and the Mauritius Police Force. The aim of Road Safety Education would be to reduce the risk of trauma from injury and death due to road accidents and to lay the foundations for safe road use. The following components of the Road Safety Education Project had been completed, to date - (a) development of the National Curriculum Framework for Road Safety Education; (b) development of Road Safety Education pupil's books and teacher's guide for grades 1 to 6; (c) publishing and distribution of Road Safety Education books, grades 1 to 6, in all Government and Roman Catholic Aided primary schools; (d) digitisation of curriculum materials for Road Safety Education for grades 1 and 2; and (e) training of 853 officers in the Education Sector on Road Safety Education. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note of the status of road capital projects being implemented by the Road Development Authority, including – (a) the Grade Separated Junction to link the Verdun Bypass and St Pierre Bypass which was completed and opened to the public on 11 July 2024; (b) the reconstruction of the New Pont Bruniquel at Tombeau Bay which was completed and opened to the public on 23 June 2024; (c) the upgrading of B28 Road (Lot 3) from Beau Champ to Bel Air which was nearing completion; and (d) the Stabilisation Works along B103 at Chamarel which was expected to end in January 2025. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the promulgation of the Central Water Authority (Dry Season) (Amendment No. 6) Regulations 2024 to extend its application until 31 August 2024. *** Page 3 of 4 7. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by relevant Ministries/Departments to commemorate World Day against Trafficking in Persons (TIP), which is observed on 30 July every year. The theme chosen by the UN for the 10th World Day against TIP is “Leave No Child Behind in the Fight Against Human Trafficking”. The following main activities which would span over a period of three months from July to September 2024, would be organised – (a) capacity building for officers engaged in the Fight against TIP by the Human Rights Division of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade; (b) sensitisation campaigns by the Police Training School and the Brigade pour la Protection de la Famille with the new recruits, newly promoted Police Sergeants and with the general public in Malls; (c) a panel discussion with all stakeholders concerned organised by the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions on the theme – “Combating Human Trafficking – The Way Forward”; (d) organisation of an Art Exhibition by students and adhering to the Blue Heart Campaign of the UN for the World Day against TIP to raise awareness amongst the general public by the Polytechnics Mauritius Ltd; (e) organisation of a round table discussion on the current legal framework on TIP by the University of Technology, Mauritius; and (f) sensitisation and educational campaigns by the officers of the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family Welfare to the general public at Social Welfare and Women Empowerment Centres. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of the “Harmonisation, Accreditation and Quality Assurance in African Higher Education 3 (HAQAA3) activities” organised by the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Secretariat, in collaboration with OBREAL from 05 to 09 August 2024 in Mauritius. The HAQAA3 initiative is a response of the European Union and African Union to provide African countries with skilled workers, managers and administrators to foster sustainable development and encourage trade and investment as well as to enhance citizenship and democratic values. The HAQAA3 activities would be in the form of round table discussions and panel meetings, as follows - (a) a Workshop on mobility, academic recognition and the African Credit Transfer System; Page 4 of 4 (b) a Consultation Meeting on the Pan African Quality Assurance and Accreditation Agency; and (c) a Regional Sustainable Development Goal 4 Workshop on strengthening data generation and promoting the culture of data use. *** 9. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of a workshop on ‘Medical Approach to Gender Based Violence’ organised by the Ministry of Gender Equality and Family Welfare in collaboration with the Defence Institute of Medical Operations of the United States Air Force School, from 29 July to 02 August 2024 in Mauritius. The objectives of the workshop would be to – (a) discuss case-based solutions for improving women’s health, gender equality and national stability through the reduction of Gender Based Violence; and (b) elaborate on topics such as ‘Healthy development, boundaries and childhood trauma’, ‘Intimate partner violence and how to screen for it’, Providing medical care to Gender Based Violence survivors, ‘Sexual assault, medical and forensic approach’ and ‘Infections related to sexual assault’, among others. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note that, as at 25 July 2024, there were 29 active cases of Dengue Fever in Mauritius, out of which one person had been hospitalised. For Rodrigues, 10 active cases of Dengue Fever had been recorded and two persons were hospitalised. Cabinet further noted that as at 25 July 2024, two persons had been hospitalised due to Leptospirosis. The Ministry of Health and Wellness was pursuing the sensitisation campaigns on Dengue Fever and Leptospirosis in collaboration with relevant stakeholders. ******