Page 1 of 11 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 14 NOVEMBER 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note that HE Emmanuel Macron, President of the French Republic will be on Official Visit to Mauritius on 20 and 21 November 2025. During the visit, the French President will, inter alia, pay a courtesy call on the President of the Republic of Mauritius, have a tête-à-tête with the Prime Minister, visit the vessel ‘Plastic Odyssey’ as well as the ‘Champlain’ Vessel, meet the Mauritian and French economic operators in the field of artificial intelligence, make a joint statement to the press together with the Prime Minister and inaugurate the French Embassy at Telfair, Moka. In the context of the forthcoming Official Visit, Cabinet has agreed to the signing of the following documents - (a) Déclaration d’intention pour la coopération sur l’économie bleue between the Ministry of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries and L’Institut de Recherche pour le Développement. The Déclaration d’intention pour la coopération sur l’économie bleue provides for mutual agreement and cooperation in the fields of, inter alia, campaigns at sea; marine biology and biotechnologies; marine genomics and biotechnology applications for aquaculture, pharmaceuticals and sea-derived products; detection of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing; research in physical oceanography; and earth observation by satellite imagery; (b) Fonds d’EXpertise Technique et d’Echanges d’expériences (FEXTE) Partnership Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Mauritius, the Agence Française de Développement and Electricité de France in the field of renewable energy in Mauritius. The Partnership Agreement seeks to strengthen dialogue and the exchange of expertise between French and Mauritian stakeholders in the field of renewable energy integration in Mauritius. The Tripartite FEXTE Partnership Agreement covers, inter alia, modernisation of the dispatching system; system studies and grid integration; and partnership with Réunion Island; (c) Déclaration d’intention pour accompagner la République de Maurice dans la gestion durable de l’eau between the Republic of Mauritius, the Agence Française de Développement, and the European Union. The Déclaration d’intention sur la gestion durable de l’eau represents a strategic partnership to advance Sustainable Development Goal 6 regarding Clean Water and Sanitation. The document is aligned with the Government Programme 2025-2029 and the Marshall Plan on the Water Sector. The Agence Française de Développement is already supporting Page 2 of 11 Government through a Budget Support Loan of EUR200 million and a grant of EUR2 million. Government has sollicited the Agence Française de Développement and the European Union for the financing of the Water Investment Programme directed toward modernising infrastructure, enhancing water governance, and promoting sustainable resource management; (d) Déclaration d’intention pour accompagner la République de Maurice dans la transition énergétique between the Republic of Mauritius, the Agence Française de Développement and the European Union. The Déclaration d’intention sur la transition énergétique provides a strategic framework for accelerating our energy transition in alignment with Sustainable Development Goal 7. Through this partnership, the Agence Française de Développement and the European Union will mobilise both financial resources and technical expertise to enhance the country’s renewable energy production, grid integration, and energy efficiency; and (e) Déclaration d’intention commune relative au développement d’un enseignement bilingue francophone et à l’appui de la politique linguistique dans le système éducatif Mauricien between the Republic of Mauritius and the French Republic. The objective of the Déclaration d’intention commune which will be fully funded by the Ministry of Europe and Foreign Affairs of the French Republic, is to develop cooperation for the preparation of a pilot project for bilingual and plurilingual education in Mauritius. It is intended to strengthen bilingual competencies in French and Kreol Morisien within the national education system. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of the revised Law Practitioners (Disciplinary Proceedings) Bill into the National Assembly. Following concerns raised by some members of the Bar, the Attorney-General held further consultations with the Bar Council and the Mauritius Law Society, on the Bill. Most proposals made were retained, more specifically the institution of an Appointment Committee, comprising the – (a) Attorney-General, as Chairperson; (b) Chairperson of the Bar Council; (c) President of the Law Society; and (d) Chairperson of the Chamber of Notaries. The main object of the revised Law Practitioners (Disciplinary Proceedings) Bill is to make provisions for simplified and codified procedures, and provide clarity and transparency, with regard to – Page 3 of 11 (a) the conduct of an independent investigation into an alleged act of professional misconduct by a law practitioner in the exercise of his profession; and (b) the institution and conduct of disciplinary proceedings against a law practitioner before the Supreme Court. The Bill provides for the establishment of the Law Practitioners Complaints Commission, which will be the sole body empowered to investigate into an alleged act of professional misconduct by a law practitioner, and decide upon the institution of disciplinary proceedings, if any, against the law practitioner before the Supreme Court. Accordingly, neither the Attorney-General, nor the Bar Council, the Chamber of Notaries and the Mauritius Law Society Council will henceforth investigate into an alleged act of professional misconduct by a law practitioner in the exercise of his profession, and none of these bodies will have the power to inflict any sanction on a law practitioner. As a result of these new provisions, consequential amendments are being brought to the Courts Act, the Law Officers Act, the Law Practitioners Act, the Mauritius Bar Association Act, the Mauritius Law Society Act and the Notaries Act. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Agence Française de Développement (Privileges and Immunities) (Amendment) Regulations 2025 aiming at extending privileges and immunities to “Expertise France”, a subsidiary of the Agence Française de Développement which implements technical assistance projects and mobilises international expertise to support public policies in the areas of governance, environment, maritime security, and pandemic response. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the promulgation of the Higher Education (Transitional Provisions Relating to the Accreditation of Institutional Accreditation Process) Regulations 2025 with a view to providing for a transitional provision, up to 31 August 2027, for higher education institutions to develop and seek accreditation for their institutional accreditation process. The Higher Education Act was amended in August 2025 and section 17 of the Act was repealed and replaced by new provisions for Accreditation of Institutional Accreditation Process, in accordance with guidelines issued by Higher Education Commission (HEC). Pending the new guidelines and the accreditation by the HEC, higher education institutions shall continue to seek the approval of the HEC for the accreditation of their programme of study. The Regulations will provide for accreditation of any programme granted by the HEC to a higher education institution under the repealed section 17 of the Act to remain valid until 31 August 2027. *** Page 4 of 11 5. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Tourism organising the Festival Internasional Kreol 2025 from 05 to 07 December 2025. The Festival Internasional Kreol showcases the authenticity of the Mauritian Creole culture, promotes community wellness, celebrates cultural diversity and supports local arts. The theme of this year’s celebration is Otantisite nu kiltir kreol. The following activities have been scheduled with the collaboration of the Association des Hôteliers et Restaurateurs de l’Ile Maurice and several hotels – (a) an opening ceremony on 05 December 2025 at Mont Choisy public beach; (b) Sega tipik, on 06 December 2025 at Four à Chaux, Trou d’Eau Douce; and (c) Regat, culinary exposition and musical show on 07 December 2025 at Mahebourg Waterfront. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the activities which will be organised by the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity to mark the International Day of Persons with Disabilities on 03 December 2025. This year’s theme is “Fostering disability inclusive societies for advancing social progress”. The focus for this year’s celebration will be to raise awareness about the abilities and contributions of persons with disabilities in every aspect of political, social, economic and cultural life, support their rights, dignity and well-being, as well as, promote social inclusion and equal opportunities. The Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity will celebrate the International Day of Persons with Disabilities in the presence of around 850 guests, comprising persons with disabilities from various non-governmental organisations on 03 December 2025 at the Auditorium of the Mahatma Gandhi Institute. *** 7. Cabinet has agreed to the participation of a Mauritian delegation in the fourth African Youth Games, scheduled from 10 to 20 December 2025, in Angola. The main objectives of the African Youth Games are talent identification and development, youth empowerment and inclusion, as well as continental integration. Mauritius will participate in 11 sports disciplines, namely Athletics, Badminton, Beach Volleyball, Beach Wrestling, Boxing, Cycling, Judo, Swimming, Table Tennis, Tennis, and Weightlifting. *** 8. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Youth and Sports undertaking the necessary preparatory works for the establishment of a National Cadet Corps (NCC) Page 5 of 11 under its purview. The proposed NCC in Mauritius would have the following key objectives – (a) to instil discipline, patriotism, social cohesion, and civic responsibility among Mauritian youth; (b) to develop leadership and resilience through structured training, camps, and community engagement; (c) to enhance national disaster preparedness and first aid response capacity through trained youth; (d) to complement existing youth and volunteer programmes (e.g. Scouts, Duke of Edinburgh, Red Cross, National and Regional Youth Councils); and (e) to encourage youth participation in national events and cultural activities. *** 9. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius endorsing, on a voluntary basis, the Call to Action on Integrated Fire Management and Wildfire Resilience and the Declaration on the Launch of the Tropical Forest Forever Facility during the 30th Session of the Conference of Parties (COP30) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change being held from 10 to 21 November in Brazil. The Call to Action on Integrated Fire Management and Wildfire Resilience aims to provide a platform for willing countries to converge around shared principles and practical cooperation, in full respect of national sovereignty and in complementarity with existing frameworks, including national climate and adaptation plans, disaster risk reduction policies, biodiversity and forest strategies, and related multilateral processes. The Tropical Forest Forever Facility aims to permanently fund the conservation of tropical forests by creating a sustainable financial mechanism which makes it more profitable to preserve forests than to destroy them. *** 10. Cabinet has taken note of the forthcoming launching of national consultations on Vision 2050 - a long-term strategic planning exercise, in line with the Government Programme 2025-2029 to lay the foundations for uplifting the country from an upper- middle-income to a high-income country with an inclusive and sustainable agenda. The national consultations will seek to capture a diversity of voices from across society, ensuring inclusiveness, intergenerational equity, and a strong sense of national ownership. A series of sectoral engagements and public outreach sessions will be organised nationwide during the forthcoming months. Vision 2050 will serve as a roadmap that will provide a coherent and forward- looking policy framework guiding socio-economic transformation, fostering long-term Page 6 of 11 resilience, and driving inclusive growth. The 25-year horizon is consistent with UN guidelines that such exercises typically cover one generation to allow for deep structural transformation. Vision 2050 will define the long-term goals and development priorities of Mauritius towards an inclusive, resilient and sustainable future. A 10-Year Development Plan will also be prepared to translate the strategic ambitions into actionable milestones, with key performance indicators to support monitoring and evaluation. Three key pillars of national development have been identified as overarching themes for consultations, as follows - (a) Prosperity - economic transformation and innovation; (b) Sustainability - environmental resilience and infrastructural development; and (c) Inclusiveness - social equity, cohesion and well-being. *** 11. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Health and Wellness signing a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Sunlife Trust. The MoU aims to establish a mutually beneficial arrangement for a specific and dedicated project concerning the development and enhancement of the new Paediatric Oncology Ward at the National Cancer Centre with the shared objective of promoting the health, comfort and overall well-being of Paediatric patients. The collaboration will pursue a renewed vision for the Paediatric Ward within the Cancer Unit, with space equipped with the necessary amenities and features to create a nurturing, child-friendly and emotionally uplifting environment. The enhanced environment will contribute significantly to the healing and well-being of young patients, while also providing comfort and reassurance to parents. *** 12. Cabinet has agreed to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Financial Services Commission and the Securities and Commodities Authority of United Arab Emirates. The main objective of the MoU is to enhance mutual cooperation and exchange of information in the fields of supervision and surveillance on securities markets and financial services providers. The main areas of collaboration provided in the MoU are as follows - (a) general cooperation on financial markets supervision and surveillance, including Anti-Money Laundering and Combatting the Financing of Terrorism, and regulatory compliance to improve transparency and enforcement of regulations; (b) joint investigation on investors’ complaints and reports; and (c) organisation of joint trainings on the subject of regulatory supervision and surveillance. *** Page 7 of 11 13. Cabinet has taken note of the decision of the United Kingdom (UK) to renew the automatic tuna derogation under the UK–Eastern and Southern Africa (ESA) Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) for a further period of five years, from 01 January 2026 to 31 December 2030, with an annual quota of 10,000 tons of preserved tuna and 340 tons of tuna loins available for export by the ESA States. The UK-ESA EPA provides, inter alia, for an automatic derogation of 6,300 tons of preserved tuna and 340 tons of tuna loins annually, normally renewable every five years by the UK-ESA EPA Committee. This derogation is shared among the ESA tuna- exporting States, namely Mauritius, Seychelles, and Madagascar. The derogation allows the sourcing of raw tuna from third countries for processing in the ESA States and export to the UK under preferential terms. For the year 2025, further to a request made by the ESA States, the UK exceptionally agreed to increase the quota for preserved tuna from 6,300 tonnes to 10,000 tonnes, while maintaining the tuna loins quota at 340 tonnes. This derogation is due to expire on 31 December 2025. The renewal of the automatic derogation will provide a boost to the Mauritian canned tuna industry as it would enable the sourcing of additional raw tuna from third countries for processing and export to the UK, thereby maintaining a competitive edge on that market. *** 14. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius extending duty free tariff treatment to goods originating from Tunisia following its accession to the COMESA Free Trade Area. *** 15. Cabinet has agreed to Mauritius hosting the Africa Kaizen Annual Conference 2026 at the request of the Japan International Cooperation Agency, in collaboration with the African Union Development Agency–New Partnership for Africa’s Development. The Africa Kaizen Annual Conference is an annual central activity of the African Kaizen Initiative comprising panel discussions based on selected themes and visits to local organisations which have demonstrated high level of Kaizen implementation. The conference will culminate in the Africa Kaizen Awards and the designation of Centres of Excellence. It is a premier continental platform that brings together policymakers, academics, and quality and productivity improvement practitioners to share knowledge and experiences to promote the Kaizen approach in the region, through policy advocacy, mutual learning and co-creating African wisdom to enhance firm capabilities and competitiveness. *** 16. Cabinet has taken note that the hybrid training session on “Greening your business: Leveraging Environmental Data and the Green Performance Toolkit”, will be held on 25 November 2025 in the context of the Project on Climate Competitiveness, in collaboration with SME Mauritius, targeting enterprises within the SME network. Page 8 of 11 The training aims to help SMEs understand the business value of environmental data and develop practical skills to collect, analyse, and use it to improve environmental performance. Participants will also learn to apply International Trade Centre’s Green Performance Toolkit to monitor and enhance their environmental footprint. Around 30 SMEs are expected to participate in the hybrid training session. *** 17. Cabinet has taken note of the Report of the Office of Public Sector Governance (OPSG) on the Organisational Review at the National Transport Corporation, and the Action Plan of the National Transport Corporation for the implementation of the recommendations contained therein. The OPSG Report has highlighted a number of weaknesses and shortcomings, essentially in the following areas and formulated several recommendations to improve the situation at the National Transport Corporation - (a) Organisational Set-up; (b) Traffic Department/Route Operations; (c) Engineering; (d) Financial Management; (e) Human Resource Management; (f) Procurement; (g) Information Technology; (h) Internal Audit; (i) Corporate Governance; and (j) Overall Efficiency and Cost Rationalisation. *** 18. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Agro-Industry, Food Security, Blue Economy and Fisheries in the Global Maritime Forum (GMF) Annual Summit 2025 and the India Maritime Week 2025 which were held in Antwerp, Belgium and in Mumbai, India, respectively. The GMF is an international platform that brings together global maritime leaders, Governments, shipping companies, international organisations and financial institutions to deliberate on the future of global seaborne trade. The Minister was a lead participant, together with the Secretary General of the International Maritime Organisation in a Working Group and also participated in a high-level session themed “Charting a Course Amid Complexity”, together with global leaders, industry experts, and policymakers to discuss strategies to make the maritime and shipping sectors stronger, safer, and more sustainable. Page 9 of 11 The India Maritime Week 2025 was organised by the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways of India on the theme “Uniting Oceans, One Maritime Vision”. The event aimed at facilitating global conversations pertaining to strategic partnerships and investment opportunities in the advancement of innovation, sustainability, and a globally connected maritime future. During his intervention in the inaugural session, the Minister emphasised the close relations between Mauritius and India, notably in the maritime domain and the imperative of addressing the adverse effects of climate change through greener shipping practices and the importance for the international community to come together in reshaping the Blue Economy. The Minister participated in the Leaders Conclave session, the Great Oceans Dialogue and a panel discussion entitled “Oceans of Opportunity: Reimagining the Global Blue Economy”. During the India Maritime Week, the Minister had bilateral meetings with several foreign dignitaries on potential areas of bilateral cooperation. *** 19. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Tourism in the 46th Edition of the World Travel Market held in London. The main objective of the participation of Mauritius at the World Travel Market was to, inter alia, strengthen the country’s visibility on that market, consolidate trade partnerships, and sustain growth in tourist arrivals. The Mauritian stand comprised major hotel groups together with key Destination Management Companies and Air Mauritius, all of whom showcased the island’s tourism offering. The Minister participated in the annual Ministers’ Summit, organised in association with the BBC and the UN World Tourism Organization. The Summit, which had as theme “Reimagining Tourism Investment Models: Building Next-Generation Incentives,” gathered over 50 Tourism Ministers and senior officials. Deliberations focused on innovation, diversified investment strategies, human capital development, and digital transformation to enhance the resilience and sustainability of the tourism sector. The Minister also had the opportunity to hold discussions with major trade and media partners. *** 20. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the Second World Summit for Social Development held in Doha, Qatar. The Summit saw the adoption of the Doha Political Declaration, which reaffirmed global solidarity and social justice as the basis for sustainable progress. During his intervention in the plenary session of the World Social Summit, the Minister highlighted the vulnerabilities of Mauritius as a Small Island Developing State. He recalled that the Government Programme 2025-2029 underlines the commitment of the Government to build a fair, inclusive and sustainable economy based on merit and opportunity for all and that the 2025-2026 Budget supports this new vision through three main pillars, Economic Renewal, A New Social Order and Fiscal Consolidation. Page 10 of 11 During his stopover in Seychelles, the Minister had a meeting with the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Diaspora of Seychelles and discussed several issues of bilateral interests. *** 21. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Labour and Industrial Relations in the Bengaluru Skill Summit 2025 held in Bengaluru, India. The Summit brought together stakeholders from across the skilling ecosystem including Government leaders, industry experts, global organisations, educators, training providers, and youth, to develop and drive actionable strategies for reskilling, upskilling, digital transformation, and employability in emerging sectors. The Minister participated in a Roundtable session on Global Best Practices in Skilling and delivered a key-note address. The Minister had a series of meetings with high dignitaries of the Karnataka Government including the Chief Minister; the Deputy Chief Minister; the Minister for Skill Development, Entrepreneurship & Livelihood, and Medical Education; the Minister for Rural Development & Panchayat Raj, and Information Technology & Biotechnology; the Minister for Small Scale Industries and Public Enterprises; and the Chairman of Karnataka Skill Development Authority. *** 22. Cabinet has taken note of the recent participation of the Junior Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the 5th Türkiye-Africa Business and Economic Forum (TABEF 2025), held in Istanbul. The Junior Minister made a statement at the opening session of the TABEF and called on combining the prospects between Africa and Türkiye to build on the emerging regional value chains that make a significant contribution to the industrialisation and socio-economic development of the African Continent. He delivered a keynote speech during a panel on Pharmaceuticals and Medical Supplies. The Junior Minister emphasised that Government-Industry cooperation is vital for securing domestic pharmaceutical supplies and fostering innovation. He highlighted the potential of Mauritius in the medical, biotechnology, and pharmaceutical sectors, noting the advantages provided by the Economic Development Board’s Investment Certificate and Premium Investor Certificate for facilitating re-export opportunities to African markets. The Junior Minister also held bilateral meetings with the Minister of Economy, Industry and Economic Integration of the Union of the Comoros, and the Minister of Trade and Entrepreneurship of Botswana, on the sidelines of the Forum. *** Page 11 of 11 23. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent virtual participation of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the continuation session of the 17th Meeting of the Council of Ministers of the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA). The Meeting addressed several issues including market access/tariff liberalisation, rules of origin, and intellectual property rights. It also took note of the financial situation of the AfCFTA Secretariat. During the meeting, the Minister highlighted the need to make information on the applicable rules of origin accessible to the private operators through an online platform to facilitate preferential trade under the AfCFTA regime and also the urgency for Member States to put in place their national legislation once the rules are adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union. *** 24. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Junior Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the Extraordinary meeting of the SADC Council of Ministers and Extraordinary Summit of SADC Heads of State and Government which were both held virtually. Following Madagascar’s renouncement of its position as chair of SADC, the Summit resolved that South Africa chairs SADC in the interim until August 2026. The Extraordinary Council took note of the outcome of the re-computation exercise of the SAMIDRC, namely that the Assessed Contributions for the SAMIDRC have been revised downwards to USD311,904,006. The shared Assessed Contribution of Mauritius now stands at USD7,663,993 instead of USD15,463,954. *** 25. Cabinet has taken note of the appointment of Mrs Marie Joëlle Coret as part- time Chairperson of the Board of the Mauritius Society of Authors. ********