Page 1 of 5 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 23 MAY 2025 1. Cabinet has taken note that yesterday Mauritius and the United Kingdom signed a historic Agreement concerning the Chagos Archipelago including Diego Garcia. Under this Agreement, the United Kingdom recognises the sovereignty of Mauritius over the entirety of the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia. The Agreement has been made public and uploaded on the website of the Prime Minister’s Office. Cabinet has also taken note that arrangements would be made for a high-level delegation to visit the Chagos Archipelago shortly, and that a committee under the chair of the Prime Minister and comprising, inter alia, representatives of the Chagossian community, would be set up to look into projects to be implemented in the Chagos Archipelago. Cabinet has further taken note that the Mauritian national flag would be raised on the islands of the Chagos Archipelago, to symbolise the sovereignty of the Republic of Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago. *** 2. Cabinet has agreed to the elaboration of new Fair Trading (E-Commerce) Regulations 2025, so as to establish a structured and enforceable regulatory framework for digital commerce. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to amendments being brought to the Cybersecurity and Cybercrime Act 2021, through the introduction of a new Bill, so as to address the issue of proliferation of communal incitement, hate speech, trolling, cyber bullying and disinformation on social media platforms, which poses a growing risk to national security, social cohesion and democratic integrity. *** 4. Cabinet has taken note of key findings of a study commissioned by the Ministry of Financial Services and Economic Planning to capture the actual contribution of the Financial Services and Global Business sectors on the Mauritian economy. The Financial Services sector is a key pillar of the Mauritian economy, supporting growth, high-skilled employment, and Government revenue. The study was undertaken by the University of Mauritius with the objective of delivering a holistic view of the sector’s total contribution to the Mauritian economy, beyond what was currently reflected in conventional statistics. The key findings of the study included, inter alia, – (a) an increase in direct employment to around 20,000 individuals in 2023; (b) a total output multiplier including direct, indirect and induced of 1.77, raising the Financial Services sector’s real contribution to Gross Domestic Product to approximately 24.7%; and Page 2 of 5 (c) significant catalytic effects, including over Corporate Social Responsibility and special levies contributed by the Financial Services sector. The Financial Services sector exhibited a strong multiplier effect, contributing significantly to high quality job creation and tax revenue well beyond its direct outputs. Its catalytic potential reinforced the need for strategic investment in key areas such as skills development, digital innovation, including emerging FinTech solutions and sustainable finance. The findings of the Economic Impact Assessment offered a robust, evidence-based rationale for continued policy focus and targeted support. Such measures were vital to ensure that the sector remains a key engine of inclusive and sustainable economic growth in Mauritius. The Ministry of Financial Services and Economic Planning would continue to engage with stakeholders and coordinate the effective implementation of these strategic reforms to secure the long-term growth and resilience of the Financial Services sector in Mauritius. *** 5. Cabinet has agreed to the introduction of a maximum mark-up mechanism on essential food products namely, margarine, butter, canned sausages, canned poultry (Luncheon meat), canned tuna, canned prawns and all types of Pasta and fresh vegetables and maximum fixed price on salt, with a view to striking the best balance between maintaining profitability and keeping the prices within a more affordable range, in the best interest of consumers. Amendments would be brought to relevant Regulations. *** 6. Cabinet has agreed to the setting-up of an Inter-Ministerial Committee to discuss the modus operandi for the timely payment of gratuity to persons under the Portable Retirement Gratuity Fund (PRGF), which provides for the payment of a gratuity to - (a) a worker, on his retirement; (b) the legal heirs or legal representative of a worker, on the death of a worker; (c) a self-employed who has contributed to the PRGF, on his retirement; or (d) the legal heirs or legal representative of a self-employed who has contributed to the PRGF, on death of the self-employed. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note of the promulgation of the Road Traffic (Crop Season) Regulations 2025 in view of the sugar cane crop season for the year 2025 starting on 10 June 2025 and ending on 15 January 2026. *** Page 3 of 5 8. Cabinet has taken note that a Digital Transformation Blueprint 2025-2029, which aims at digitalising Government-to-Business, Government-to-Citizens and Government-to-Government services would be launched by the Ministry of Information Technology, Communication and Innovation. The Blueprint would set out a strategic vision for a smart, inclusive and sustainable digital future. Centred around four core pillars and supported by five critical enablers, it would outline a comprehensive roadmap to modernise public services, empower citizens, stimulate economic innovation and promote environmental sustainability. The Blueprint aims to transform public service delivery through the establishment of unified data centres, the implementation of a Mobile ID system and the adoption of digital documents. These initiatives will enable seamless Government-to-Citizen, Government-to- Government, and Government-to-Business interactions, all accessible via a unified digital portal or super application. *** 9. Cabinet has agreed to the Ministry of Health and Wellness signing a Clinical Training Framework Agreement with Charles Telfair Company Ltd T/A Curtin Mauritius. The aim of the Clinical Training Framework Agreement would be to, inter alia, – (a) establish a structured collaboration to facilitate the clinical training of undergraduate nursing students from Curtin Mauritius at Victoria Hospital, specialised hospitals, and Primary Health Care Centres; (b) ensure that the clinical training were carried out under appropriate supervision and in accordance with guidelines of the Ministry of Health and Wellness and the Higher Education Commission; and (c) define the roles, responsibilities, and obligations of both parties and of the students in the delivery of the training programme. *** 10. Cabinet has agreed to the setting-up of a Steering Committee to coordinate the implementation of the project for the setting up and operation of two regional Integrated Waste Processing Facilities on a Public-Private-Partnership basis. In order to allow for a high-quality waste stream to the Integrated Waste Processing Facilities, waste segregation at source would be fundamental through the provision of three bins to each household namely, one for organic wastes, one for recyclable materials and the third one for residual wastes to be sent to the landfill. The Integrated Waste Processing Facilities were expected to come into operation in March 2027 and well before that time, Government would operationalise the source segregation strategy by providing bins to householders, deploying adequate logistics for separate collection of waste at the level of Local Authorities, making appropriate Source Segregation Regulations and undertaking an aggressive information/sensitisation campaign. *** Page 4 of 5 11. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised to commemorate World Environment Day 2025, which is celebrated annually on 05 June. The theme retained for this year is “Ending Plastic Pollution”. The Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change would reaffirm the commitment of Government to providing a clean and healthy environment for the well-being of all inhabitants, flora, fauna and the economy of Mauritius through the enhancement of environmental enforcement. A workshop on Enhancing Environmental Enforcement would be held on 03 June 2025 at the Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Public Service and Innovation to bring all enforcing agencies and authorities involved in enforcement of environmental issues for improved coordination. The workshop would aim at strengthening inter-agency cooperation, reducing duplication of efforts and fostering a more efficient approach to environmental protection. The following activities would also be carried out - (a) launching of a series of 10 factsheets as well as 10 video cartoons on different environmental themes, which would be aired on TV; (b) launching of a Campaign on illegal dumping and littering; (c) holding of meetings with Chairpersons of Green Cells set up at the level of Ministries, Departments and Parastatal bodies for the implementation of the Action Plan for the Greening of the Public Sector project; (d) launching of the Observatoire de L’Environnement in collaboration with the Agence Française de Développement; and (e) launching of a pilot paper recycling project in 10 primary and 10 secondary schools. *** 12. Cabinet has taken note of the holding of a validation workshop by the Ministry of Industry, SME and Cooperatives on 11 June 2025 to finalise a draft Report on Technical Assistance to further enhance the development of the Leather Value Chain in Mauritius, which had been prepared by the Africa Leather and Leather Products Institute. Some 100 participants from Government institutions, Ministry of Industrial Development, SMEs and Cooperatives and operators in the leather sector of Mauritius ranging from upholstery and shoe-makers to manufacturers of leather bags would attend the validation workshop. The panellists from the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) would hold discussions on the key findings and recommendations of the draft Report. The workshop would comprise a hands on training by the Africa Leather and Leather Products Institute and assist in the development of an action plan based on the validated recommendations. *** Page 5 of 5 13. Cabinet has taken note of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Financial Services and Economic Planning in the 12th Edition of the Africa CEO Forum Annual Summit held in Abidjan, Côte D’Ivoire. The event was organised by the “Jeune Afrique Media Group” and co-hosted by the International Finance Corporation, the investment arm of the World Bank. The Forum focused on driving economic growth and sustainable development in Africa by fostering dialogue between the public and private sectors. It featured discussions on leadership, digital transformation, regional economic integration, and innovative financing strategies. The theme of the Forum was “Can a New Deal Between State and Private Sector Deliver the Continent a Winning Hand?” The Minister participated as a speaker on a panel on “Cost of Capital Crisis: How Can African Business Turn Geopolitical Shifts to Its Advantage”. In the margin of the Conference, the Minister had several meetings with, inter alia, the Senior Bureau Official-US Dept of State, the UK Trade Commissioner for Africa, the Head of West Africa for UK Export Finance, the CEO of KFW DEG (German DFI), the President and CEO of Africa Finance Corporation, the Chairperson of the Board of Directors of Atlantic Finance Group and the Advisor to the Minister of Investment in United Arab Emirates. *** 14. Cabinet has taken note of the of the outcome of the recent participation of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in the Resilience in Action Summit for Small Island Developing States (SIDS) organised by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)-Fund in Vienna. The Minister participated in a Ministerial Roundtable which fostered an actionable dialogue on financial barriers facing Small Island Developing States, including debt sustainability, currency fluctuations, and access to affordable finance. He also attended the launch of the Island Resilience Facility by the OPEC-Fund. The Island Resilience Facility aims at providing financial, technical and knowledge-based assistance to SIDS. In the margin of the event, the Minister had meetings with the President of the OPEC- Fund, the Minister for European and International Affairs of Austria and the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. *** 15. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the – (a) Board of the Taxi Operators Welfare Fund, with Mr Ham Sharma Kowlessur as part-time Chairperson; (b) Board of the Institute of Technical Education and Technology, with Mr Deo Prakash Ramkalawon as part-time Chairperson; and (c) Board of the State Informatics Ltd with Mr Joyadeep Beeharry, as part-time Chairperson. ******