Page 1 of 2 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 01 NOVEMBER 2024 1. Cabinet has taken note that the Finance and Audit (Solidarity Fund) (Amendment) Regulations 2024 would be promulgated to provide for the renaming of the Solidarity Fund as the Poverty Reduction Fund, as announced in the 2024-2025 Budget. The scope of the Fund had been extended to include the financing of additional Government schemes comprising, inter alia, – (a) schemes relating to personal loss suffered by individuals as a result of natural calamities; (b) digital eyeglasses for all blind and low vision learners of primary and secondary schools; (c) the Overseas Treatment Scheme; (d) the Equal Chance Allowance; (e) sanitary pads for girls attending school; and (f) financial assistance to the State Trading Corporation with respect to the subsidy on the retail price of 12 kg Liquefied Petroleum Gas cylinders. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note that an earthquake of magnitude 5.1 had occurred at 02 24 hours (local time) on 01 November 2024 near coordinates 19.945˚ South in latitude and 66.280˚ East in longitude, at about 300 km to the East of Rodrigues. The depth of the earthquake was around 10 km. The earthquake was not tsunamigenic and the Mauritius Meteorological Services (MMS) was constantly monitoring sea level through the tide gauge at Rodrigues. The MMS was monitoring the situation and was in contact with the Meteorological Station at Rodrigues and the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre. *** 3. Cabinet has taken note that a suspected case of Mpox was reported on 25 October 2024. The Ministry of Health and Wellness had initiated contact tracing exercises on the same day. In accordance with the Protocol for the Management of Mpox, the Ministry of Health and Wellness had, inter alia, taken the following actions – (a) the WHO Country Office was informed of the case, in line with Article 6 of the International Health Regulations 2005; (b) the Infection Prevention Control measures had been reinforced at Dr A.G. Jeetoo Hospital in respect of that particular case; and (c) an Outbreak Team had also been deployed to follow up with all isolated persons and report to the Communicable Diseases Control Unit. *** Page 2 of 2 4. Cabinet has agreed to the hosting of the 2024 CEO Forum of African Development Finance Institutions by the Development Bank of Mauritius from 04 to 06 November 2024, in Mauritius. The CEO Forum would aim at bringing together Chief Executive Officers and senior officials from supervisory Ministries/agencies, central banks, multilateral development banks amongst others, to discuss issues around strengthening development finance and architecture for greater efficiency in promoting the development agenda. The theme of the CEO 2024 Forum is “Sustaining Development Finance in Africa: Perspective into the future”. The objective of the Forum would be for CEOs to meet and discuss on ways and means of enhancing resource mobilisation for development projects, fostering green energy transition and addressing climate change issues, as well as sharing of experience. *** 5. Cabinet has taken note of the organisation of activities in the context of World Fisheries Day 2024, which is celebrated on 21 November every year, with the aim of highlighting the critical importance of healthy ocean ecosystems and ensuring sustainable stocks of fisheries in the world. The Ministry of Blue Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries and Shipping, in collaboration with the Fishermen Welfare Fund, would organise the following activities at Le Morne Public Beach – (a) inter-religious prayers; (b) a wreath laying ceremony; and (c) a parade by the National Coast Guard. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the reconstitution of the Taxi Operators Welfare Fund Board with Mrs Moheenee Nathoo, Senior Chief Executive of the Ministry of Land Transport and Light Rail, as part-time Chairperson. *****