Page 1 of 2 HIGHLIGHTS OF CABINET MEETING – FRIDAY 29 NOVEMBER 2024 1. Cabinet has taken note that following a fire breakout on the night of 05 November 2024, at the Mare Chicose Landfill, a Coordination Committee chaired by a senior officer of the Ministry of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate Change was meeting on a daily basis, to coordinate the actions and interventions required by different bodies to combat the fire and assess progress. The methodology adopted to extinguish the fire comprised the breaking of the waste mass by means of excavators, cooling by application of water and covering the extinguished waste with soil. As at 28 November 2024 mid-day, around 19,250m2 had been covered completely. With the additional equipment and soil being received from the private sector, it was expected to increase the coverage rate to 2,000m2 per day to completely extinguish the fire by mid- December 2024. *** 2. Cabinet has taken note that a comprehensive report on the state of the economy was currently under preparation. *** 3. Cabinet has agreed to extend the transition period for the renewal at Post Offices of Motor Vehicles Licences in respect of private and company vehicles, from 02 December 2024 up to end of June 2025. *** 4. Cabinet has agreed to the implementation of the following measures for the revamping of the organisation of horse racing at the Champ de Mars – (a) the grant of a five-year lease for the exclusive use of the Champ de Mars racetracks to the Mauritius Turf Club Jockey Club Ltd; and (b) the setting up of a High-level Committee under the chairmanship of the Secretary to Cabinet and Head of the Civil Service – (i) to finalise the modalities for the signature of a lease agreement; and (ii) to conduct a regulatory review of the present legal framework governing horse racing, including the Gambling Regulatory Authority Act. *** Page 2 of 2 5. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by the Ministry of Health and Wellness in the context of World AIDS Day 2024, which is observed on 01 December every year to raise awareness about HIV and AIDS. The theme chosen by the United Nations for this year is “Take the RIGHTS Path”. To mark World AIDS Day, the Ministry of Health and Wellness would officially launch the HIV Self-Test kit in Mauritius on 30 November 2024. Other activities to commemorate the Day include, inter alia, - (a) a one-day workshop in collaboration with the Central Health Laboratory to further train private pharmacists on HIV Self-Test, Directly Assisted HIV Self- Test, and the HIV and AIDS (Amendment) Act 2023; (b) three half-day awareness sessions targeting 180 officers from 10 departments of the Airport; (c) HIV sensitisation and testing campaigns in the community in collaboration with NGO PILS and Collectif Arc-En-Ciel; (d) TV programmes on HIV and AIDS under “Priorité Santé”; (e) talks on radio and television in creole and Bhojpuri on HIV and AIDS; and (f) activities by the Prisons Services at the Eastern High Security Prison, Melrose. *** 6. Cabinet has taken note of the activities being organised by the Ministry of Social Integration, Social Security and National Solidarity in the context of the International Day of Persons with Disabilities, which is observed on 03 December every year. The commemoration of the International Day of Persons with Disabilities serves to highlight the necessity of promoting the rights, dignity and inclusion of Persons with Disabilities. A half-day workshop would be conducted on 04 December 2024, with all relevant stakeholders. The theme for discussion would be “Consultation for Change”. *** 7. Cabinet has taken note that admission in Grade 1 and Grade 7 as well as Grade 10 in Academies would be on Friday 10 January 2025. All schools would fully resume on Monday 13 January 2025. *** 8. Cabinet has taken note that further to representations received from pre-primary school teachers regarding a decrease in their salaries of November 2024, adjustments would be made to their salaries with payment of arrears in December 2024. ******