D Runnoo v Re Max 24 Property Group Limited 2025 IND 30 THE INDUSTRIAL COURT CN: 444/23 In the matter of: - RUNNOO D v RE MAX 24 PROPERTY GROUP LIMITED Defendant Judgment A. Background 1. The plaintiff was in continuous employment of defendant as Admin executive since 16/01/23. 2. By virtue of a claim, the Plaintiff is praying for a judgement condemning and ordering defendant to pay to him the sum of Rs 56,026 /- together with such amount as compensation for wages lost or expenses incurred in attending Court. B. Plaintiff’s Case 3. For the purposes of the make out, the Labour Officer called Mrs Runnoo, plaintiff. 4. The plaintiff stated that she was employed on a 5-day week basis and remunerated at monthly intervals at the terminal basic rate of Rs 45,000/- per month. 5. Following an incident, the plaintiff considers that by the acts and doing of the defendant her employment was terminated without notice or justification. 6. The plaintiff considers that the defendant has failed to pay her one month’s wages as indemnity in lieu of notice, end of year bonus for 2023 and travelling for the period of 16/01/23 to 15/03/23. 7. She therefore prayed for a judgement condemning and ordering defendant to pay to them the sum of Rs 56,026/-. 8. The plaintiff stated that the averment in paragraph 4 will not be insisted upon. C. Defendant’s Case 9. Defendant did not appear to Court. D. Analysis 10. The provision of the law governing default judgments is as follows: “Where on the day so fixed in the summons, or at any continuation or adjournment of the Court or cause in which the summons was issued, the defendant does not appear, or does not sufficiently excuse his absence, the Court, upon proof of the service of the summons, may give judgment in terms of the plaint or, where the cause includes a claim for substantial damages, proceed to the hearing of the witnesses and trial of the cause on the part of the plaintiff only, and in either case, the judgment shall, subject to subsection (2), be as if both parties had attended.” 11. However, it is imperative to note that a failure of a Defendant to take action by leaving default does not invariably mean that a default judgment is relegated to an administrative act only or a matter of course in favour of the Plaintiff. 12. As rightly pointed out by Learned Queen Counsel during his submissions and quoted with approval by their Lordships in the case of Velvindron v Noordally1, ‘making out a case does not mean that one has got to jump both feet over all the principles of evidence and all the matters required in order to make out a case but Your Lordships will remember the case in which a party came and asked for judgment in a road accident but failed to state that the driver was the préposé of the defendant and the court concludes that there is not sufficient evidence because if he has assumed those matters they have got to be proved.’ 1 [1979 SCJ 374] 13. Similarly, in Hurnam D. v. Bholah K. B. & Anor. 2, it was stated: “(…) A court of law is under a positive obligation to ensure that any judgment given is soundly grounded both in law and on the facts of the case before it. This obligation is not in any manner reduced by the fact that the judgment is a judgment by default. (…).” 14. Since the Plaintiff’s case has remained unrebutted as a result of non- appearance of the Defendant before this Court and in the light of the evidence adduced, the Court finds Plaintiff’s case proven on a balance of probabilities. 15. The plaintiff stated he will not insist on paragraph 4, that is “interest at the legal rate from the date of the lodging of the plaint until final judgement, with costs”. 16. Therefore, the Court orders Judgment in favour of the Plaintiff, ordering and condemning the Defendant to pay the sum of Rs 56,026/-. S N Ganoo-Arekion (Mrs) [Delivered by: S N Ganoo Arekion (Mrs), Ag. President, Industrial Court] [Delivered on: 24 April 2025] 2 [2009 SCJ 265]